CURRENTS

a. Purpose:  Determine the set and drift (velocity) of the tidal current at a desired time, using data
extracted from a Tidal Current Table, as taught in the USPS Advanced Piloting (AP) 85/86 course or the AP
2011 (or AP 2004) course (see Operation).  (This is not a tidal current prediction program.)  The Current
tool uses a form similar to the worksheet of the AP 85/86 course.

b. Operation:  For determining the tidal current at a reference station, required inputs are the desired
time and the times of the slack and maximum (flood or ebb) that bracket the desired time, and the
velocity and set of the maximum, obtained from Table 1 of the tidal current table.  For determining the
tidal current at a substation, additional required inputs are the Table 2 differences for times and
velocities of the slack(s) and maximum(s).  When determining the tidal current at a substation, it is
often not obvious which slack and maximum bracket the desired time, because of the Table 2 time
differences.  In those cases, the other slack and maximum Table 1 and Table 2 data can be entered to help
determine the proper slack and maximum to use.  Required times cannot be left blank, even if the required
time is 0000.  All other inputs are optional, and can be used when a printed record of a complete tide
determination is desired.

Note:  Tidal current tables use standard time.  The user must convert daylight savings times to standard
times before extracting data from the Tidal Current Table.

When entering the Table 2 time differences, use the format of the Tidal Current Table, i.e. the sign goes
with the hour, even if the hour is zero. However, plus signs and leading zeros can be omitted.

The program will recognize when the selected times of slack and maximum  cross midnight.

Activating the "Calculate" button starts the calculation.  Once the localized times and velocities are
calculated, the user must determine which slack and which maximum are the ones that bracket the desired
time, and check the appropriate check boxes.  (For technical reasons, this selection is not done
automatically.)  Only one slack and one maximum can be selected.  As soon as a second check box is
checked, the calculation is completed using the selected option.  If only one slack time and only one
maximum time are entered, their boxes will be automatically checked and the calculation completed.

For "normal" locations, i.e. those where there is little or no hydraulic current, there are options to
determine the velocity factor by doing the calculation mathematically (the default), where the actual
values are used; or by using Table 3A values (as taught in AP 85/86), where the actual entering arguments
are rounded to tabular values; or to do the calculation using the "50-90 Rule" (as taught in AP 2011 and
AP 2004).  For locations where there is a strong hydraulic current, the Table 3B option should be used.

When switching from one option to another there is no need to activate the "Calculate" button.

Choices that would be circled on a paper worksheet will appear in bold type.

Activating the "Clear" button clears all inputs and outputs.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  As with tidal current tables, the computation assumes that the increase (flood)
and decrease (ebb) of the tidal current velocity conform to simple sine curves.  This is often not true,
so the tidal current velocities obtained will be approximate. The most accurate results are obtained
using mathematical calculation for the velocity factor.  Using the Table 3A option adds a bit of error to
the theoretical (sine) calculation, and the "50-90 Rule" can, but will not necessarily, impose a  larger
error, but these errors are usually no more than a half a knot, and are probably less relevant than if
the flood and ebb do not conform to a sine curve.

Localized velocities are rounded to hundredths of a knot, except for the "50-90 Rule" where they are
rounded to tenths of a knot.  The predicted velocity is rounded to tenths of a knot.

Celestial Tools uses the method of the PREDICTION OF CURRENT AND DIRECTION form of AP 2011 and AP 2004
for the "50-90 Rule".  Note that if the Time Difference converted to minutes (line (4) of the form) is
not evenly divisible by three, then Time#3 on line (6) will differ from the later of the bracketed times
(line (1)) by one minute.

