DISTANCES

a. Purpose:  Calculate the distance to the natural horizon (Bowditch 2002 Table 12).  Calculate the
geographical range of visibility (the maximum distance an object can be seen) (Bowditch 2002 Table 13).
These values are a function of height of eye, the height of the object, and the curvature of the earth,
and not the clarity of the atmosphere, quality of illumination, etc.

Calculate the distance to an object based on a measured vertical angle by three methods: 1) Distance by
Vertical Angle Measured Between Waterline at Object and Top of Object (Bowditch 2002 Table 16):
Calulates the distance to an object of known height above sea level lying within the observer's visible
horizon. 2) Distance by Vertical Angle Measured Between Waterline at Object and Sea Horizon Beyond Object
(Bowditch 2002 Table 17):  Calculates the distance to an object lying within or short of the horizon when
the height of eye of the observer is known. 3) Distance by Vertical Angle Measured Between Sea Horizon
and Top of Object Beyond Sea Horizon (Bowditch 2002 Table 15):  Calculates the distance to an object of
known height above sea level when the object lies beyond the horizon.

Vertical angles are typically measured with a sextant.

b. Operation:  Select the desired function.  Boxes for only the required inputs will appear.

For all calculators, Height of Eye (HE) can be entered in feet, meters, inches, or centimeters.  Height
of Object can be entered in feet or meters. Heights are limited to four characters, including a decimal
point.  (The maximum value of Height of Object in the tables is 984 feet or 300 meters in Table 13.  The
maximum value of Height of Eye in the tables is 820 feet or about 250 meters in Table 12.  Table 15
allows up to 2000 feet for the difference between the Height of Object and Height of Eye.  Older editions
of Bowditch had heights of eye up to 10000 feet.)  All heights of eye and heights of objects are above
the waterline.  Note that most published lists show heights referred to mean high water.

Distance of the Horizon:  Enter the HE value and unit.  Press the "Calculate" button, and the distance to
the natural horizon will be displayed in nautical miles (nm) and statute miles (mi).  (One application of
the distance to the natural horizon would be to determine whether an island obscures the natural horizon
when checking the available azimuth range of a new "Favorite Place" on a chart.)

Geographical Range of Visibility:  Enter the HE value and unit and the height of object value and unit.
Press the "Calculate" button, and the geographical range of visibility will be displayed in nautical
miles (nm) and a statute miles (mi).

For all Distance by Vertical Angle calculators, the uncorrected vertical angle, hs, is the vertical angle
measured with a sextant before correcting for index error and dip.  hs and index error (IE) can be
entered in either degrees and decimal minutes (DM.m) or degrees, minutes, and seconds (DMS).  hs is
limited to 89º59.9' or 89º59'59".  (These values far exceed practical use, but are allowed for academic
reasons.)  Corrected altitude is limited to 90º. (The maximum value in the tables is 30º in Table 15.)
Off the arc index error can be entered as either the actual reading from the sextant ("off the arc
(rdg.)") or the calculated value ("off the arc (val.)"); the program makes the appropriate adjustment
when calculating index correction.  (Take, for example, an arc reading between 1 and 2 degrees and a
micrometer drum reading of 22.3 minutes.  This can be entered as either 2°22.3' off the arc (rdg.) or as
1°37.7' off the arc (val.).  Either will give an index correction of +1°37.7.)

Distance by Vertical Angle Measured Between Waterline at Object and Top of Object:  Enter the HE value
and unit.  Enter hs and IE.  Press the "Calculate" button, and the distance to object will be displayed
in nautical miles (nm) and statute miles (mi).

Distance by Vertical Angle Measured Between Waterline at Object and Sea Horizon Beyond Object:  Enter the
HE value and unit.  Enter hs and IE. Press the "Calculate" button, and the distance to object will be
displayed in yards, nautical miles (nm), and statute miles (mi).

Distance by Vertical Angle Measured Between Sea Horizon and Top of Object Beyond Sea Horizon:  Enter the
HE value and unit and the height of object value and unit.  Enter hs and IE.  Press the "Calculate"
button, and the distance to object will be displayed in nautical miles (nm) and a statute miles (mi).

For all Distance by Vertical Angle calculators, the Corrected Altitude (measured sextant altitude, hs,
corrected for index error and dip, where appropriate) will also be shown, for use as an entering argument
in comparing results with the Bowditch tables.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  Distance to natural horizon and geographical range of visibility are rounded to
tenths of a mile (nautical or statute).

Distance by Vertical Angle Measured Between Waterline at Object and Top of Object:  This calculator
provides the solution of a plane right triangle having its right angle at the base of the observed object
and its altitude coincident with the vertical dimension of the observed object.  It is based on the
following simplifying assumptions:  (1) height of eye is zero; (2) the sea surface between the observer
and the object is flat; (3) atmospheric refraction is negligible; (4) the waterline at the object is
vertically below the peak of the object.  The error due to the height of eye of the observer does not
exceed 3% of the distance off for sextant angles less than 20º and heights of eye less than 1/3 of the
object height.  The error due to the waterline not being below the peak of the object does not exceed 3%
of the distance off when the height of eye is less than 1/3 of the object height and the offset of the
waterline from the base of the object is less than 1/10 of the distance off.  Errors due to the earth's
curvature and atmospheric refraction are negligible for cases of practical interest.  Distance is rounded
to hundredths of a mile (nautical or statute).

Distance by Vertical Angle Measured Between Waterline at Object and Sea Horizon Beyond Object:  This
calculator corrects the measured angle (hs) for index error.  An average value of terrestrial refraction
and the mean radius of the earth are used.  Distance is rounded to whole yards and hundredths of a mile
(nautical or statute).

Distance by Vertical Angle Measured Between Sea Horizon and Top of Object Beyond Sea Horizon:  This
calculator corrects the measured angle (hs) for index error and dip.  It uses the standard value
refraction.  An error may be introduced if standard refraction does not apply due to non-standard
temperature and atmospheric pressure.  Distance is rounded to tenths of a mile (nautical or statute).

Because of the vagaries of rounding, the output of Celestial Tools may not precisely match the Bowditch
tables.

