GENERAL

Special Windows Requirement for Celestial Tools:
The short Date Format on your computer must be the following format  MM/dd/yyyy
To verify this open the Control Panel application & select Region to view the short date format.

a. Purpose:  Although the data produced by Celestial Tools is fairly accurate, the program should not be
used for navigation.  Its primary purpose is instructional:  to aid students in planning sights; to allow
students to quickly check the quality of sights; and to help students find errors in their work. It is
not intended to do the work for the student.

b.  System requirements i. Operating System:  Windows 7, 8, or 10 ii. CPU:  Anything capable of running a
	current copy of Windows should be fine iii. Support files:  All required support files are
	included in the released exe program and associated release folders iv. Hard disk space:  6-7
	megabytes plus additional space for Sight Log and Favorites files created v. Memory:  Less than
	10MB available memory if all tools are running. vi. Screen resolution:  800x600 or greater.  If
	you are using 800x600 and your Windows taskbar is at the bottom of the screen and Auto hide is
	not enabled, the bottom of the Sight Reduction window will be obscured by the taskbar.  It is
	recommended that Auto hide be enabled or the taskbar be moved to the right side of the screen.
	The same recommendation is made for any other toolbars, such as the Microsoft Office toolbar,
	that might obscure part of a window. vii. Fonts:  Tahoma, Arial, Courier New, and Symbol,
	provided with Windows.  (Windows 95 will substitute MS Sans Serif for Tahoma.)  With the
	exception of Windows 10, font size must be set to 96 dpi (called small, smaller, standard,
	normal, or 100% depending on operating system). viii. Mouse:  Recommended ix. Printer:
	Recommended

c. Windows: Most of the working windows have two types of sections:  data entry and output display.  All
windows can be minimized and moved but cannot be maximized or resized.

d. Tool Tip Text: When the cursor is over many of the items in the data entry section of a window, a tool
tip will appear, showing information such as the allowable input range.

e. Inputs:  The inputs for all modules are set up to require minimum keystrokes. For example, a longitude
of "072" degrees and "04.0" minutes can simply be entered as "72" and "4".  There is considerable error
checking, warning you if you have entered obviously incorrect values.  In certain cases, if you have
entered an illegal value, the program will not let you move on until you enter a legal value.  Except for
the Interpolation tool, which has special rules; the Observed ZT of LAN in Noon Sight; the desired ZT for
body visibility in Sight Planner, which cannot be left blank; and the DR L in Sight Reduction Latitude by
altitude of Polaris, which has special meaning when left blank, numerical inputs initially left blank are
treated as zero, but subsequent zero entries should be of the proper format as shown in the associated
tool tip text.

Most arc-minute data input boxes expect a format of MM.m, i.e. four characters including the decimal
point, with only one digit after the decimal point. Currently there is nothing in Celestial Tools to
prevent inputs of M.mm or .mmm.  Be careful with these boxes.  Also, if one of these boxes has a value in
it that includes a decimal point, and you wish to change it to a value that starts with a decimal point,
it is best not to highlight the original value and try to enter the new value.  It will not accept an
initial decimal point in these circumstances.  It is best to to delete the original value before entering
the new value, or start the new value with a zero, followed by the decimal point.

Note:  Celestial Tools only accepts digits and dots (periods) for numerical inputs.  It will work for
computers set for a language other than U.S. English, but inputs must use dots (periods), rather than
commas (or anything else), as decimal separators, regardless of the language.  Outputs will be displayed
in the format of the selected language.

f. "Almanac" Accuracy:  The Sight Planner, Sight Reduction, and Noon Sight tools contain a medium-
precision "almanac" for the 57 navigational stars, the four navigational planets, the Sun, the Moon, and
Polaris, plus 70 additional "helper" stars (see Sight Planner Help), limited to the years 1901-2099. It
also includes "tables" for dip, refraction, and Increments and Corrections. Accuracy details are
described below, and values generally will not exactly agree with the Nautical Almanac.  However, they
are more than accurate enough to achieve results consistent with the purpose of the program.

It should be noted that the Nautical Almanac itself does not claim perfect accuracy.  From page 261,
paragraph 24, regarding the accuracy of the main data:  "The quantities tabulated in this Almanac are
generally correct to the nearest 0.1'; the exception is the Sun's GHA which is deliberately adjusted by
up to 0.15' to reduce the error due to ignoring the v-correction....The largest error that can occur in
the GHA or Dec of any body other than the Sun or Moon is less than 0.2'; it may reach 0.25' for the GHA
of the Sun and 0.3' for that of the Moon....In practice it may be expected that only one third of the
values of GHA and Dec taken out will have errors larger than 0.05' and less than one tenth will have
errors larger than 0.1'."

A note about Delta T:  Delta T is a measure of the difference between a time scale based on the rotation
of the Earth and an idealized uniform timescale at the surface of the Earth.  For maximum accuracy of
positional data, the value of Delta T must be included in calculations.  But the rotation of the Earth is
not constant, so Delta T cannot be predicted - it can only be inferred from observations.  For past years
in the "telescopic era" (starting in 1620) the value of Delta T has been measured and recorded, but
values for the future can only be extrapolated from recent data.  Two sources of Delta T predictions are
generally considered :  the United States Naval Observatory (USNO) MICA v2.2.2 software package, and the
International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS) Sub-bureau for Rapid Service and
Predictions.  The values of Delta T from these two sources have been diverging since 2006.  The current
observed Delta T trend is increasing less rapidly than the MICA predictions but more rapidly than the
IERS predictions.  This is a problem for almanac producers when trying to estimate suitable values of
Delta T for future almanacs.  This raises the question of whether computer programs like Celestial Tools
should use known values of Delta T in its calculations, or the predicted values that the almanac
producers might have used.  Most programs either require the user to enter a value of Delta T, which can
be obtained from the USNO web site and other sources, or have a built-in table or polynomial expansions
(which is what Celestial Tools uses), for past years.  For this reason, positions calculated by programs,
based on recorded Delta T values, could be different from almanac values based on Delta T predictions.
For the years since 2010, recent observed data indicates that Delta T has been increasing by about 0.36
seconds per year.  For 31 December 2099, the last date allowed by Celestial Tools, the difference in
Delta T between the MICA prediction and the 0.36 seconds per year extrapolation is about 104 seconds.
This may sound like a lot, but for the Moon, the body most affected by Delta T, this amounts to only a 1'
difference in GHA.  For this reason, Celestial Tools will continue to use the MICA predictions until they
are changed.

Positional accuracy of the bodies: Considering the accuracy statements in the Nautical Almanac, for the
Sight Reduction and Noon Sight tools the expected worst case errors for the parameters used to calculate
the GHA and declination, compared to values extracted from the Nautical almanac, are: Stars:  SHA 0.1'
(Note 1); Dec 0.1' (Note 1); GHA Aries hr 0.1'; GHA Aries m s 0.0'; Dec 0.1' Planets:  GHA hr 0.1'; GHA m
s 0.0'; v 0.1'; v corr 0.1' (Note 2); Dec hr 0.1'; d 0.1'; d corr 0.1' (Note 2); also see Note 3 Sun:
GHA hr 0.1' (Note 4); GHA m s 0.0; Dec hr 0.1'; d 0.1'; d corr 0.1' (Note 2) Moon:  GHA hr 0.1'; GHA m s
0.0; v 0.1'; v corr 0.1' (Note 2); Dec hr 0.1'; d 0.1'; d corr 0.1' (Note 2)

Note 1:  For the SHA and declination of the stars, the Nautical Almanac uses the value for UT 12h of the
middle day of the three days covered by a daily page.  Celestial Tools has options to do it that way or
using the actual date and time of the sight for its calculation of SHA.  In either case a discrepancy of
no more than 0.1' is expected. Note 2:  The v corr and d corr should be accurate for whatever v or d
value is calculated, but since the calculated v or d value can have an error of 0.1', so can v corr and d
corr.  The v and d values of the planets and the d value of the Sun listed in the Nautical Almanac are
"averages" for the three days shown on the page.    For the Sun and planets, the Sight Reduction tool has
two modes.  In the Nautical Almanac mode Celestial Tools calculates the d value for the Sun and the v and
d values for the planets using an "average" for the three days shown on the page.  In the Accurate mode
it calculates these values for the date and time of the sight.  In the Noon Sight tool, only the
"average" value is used to calculate d.  Celestial Tools calculates the v corr and d corr based on the
Greenwich year of the sight.  See Yellow Pages (I&C) Help regarding differences in Nautical Almanac
Increments and Corrections tables. Note 3:  The planet Venus exhibits phases like the Moon, which can be
seen with optical aid.  From 1952 to 1984 the additional corrections for Venus listed in the Nautical
Almanac allowed for both parallax and phase.  The phase correction was required because the tabulated
position was for the planet's center of disk.  Before 1952 and since 1985 the tabulated position of Venus
is for its center of light, and the phase correction is incorporated into the tabulated values of GHA and
Dec.  Celestial Tools does not correct for phase, i.e. it calculates the position of the center of disk
(as do most sources other than the Nautical Almanac), so the GHA of Venus can be as much as an additional
0.5' off compared to the Nautical Almanac for years other than 1952-1984.  (Mars also exhibits phases,
but the effect is negligible.) Note 4:  0.1' for Sight Reduction when set for "NA val. of hourly GHA/d"
and for Noon Sight.  (0.0' for about 99% of the cases.)  0.2' for Sight Reduction when set for "Accurate
val. of hourly GHA/d" and for Sight Planner Star Finder Data. (The "averages" used by the Nautical
Almanac to determine the v and d values for the planets and the d value for the Sun are based on the
difference between the associated value at 0h UT of the middle day of the page and 0h UT on the following
day, divided by 24, as confirmed by Catherine Hohenkerk of HMNAO.  This is in contrast to what is said in
Bowditch (through the 2002 edition), which states that they are based on the difference between the 1200
UT value and the 1300 UT value of the middle day.  According to Sean Urban, Chief of the Nautical Almanac
Office of the US Naval Observatory, these correction will be made in the next edition of Bowditch,
expected mid-2017.)

The Sight Reduction tool attempts to duplicate the steps of a manual reduction, adding several
parameters, each with a potential error, to get a total. As such, the resulting GHA or declination might
not match the values obtained from a source that calculates GHA and declination directly, such as the
Sight Planner Star Finder Data tool.  Considering this, the expected worst case errors for GHA and
declination are: Stars:  GHA 0.2'; Dec 0.1' Planets:  GHA 0.2' (0.7' for Venus compared to Nautical
Almanacs before 1952 and since 1985); Dec 0.2' Sun:  GHA 0.2' (when set for "NA val. of hourly GHA"); Dec
0.2' Moon:  GHA 0.2'; Dec 0.2'

For Latitude by Altitude of Polaris, the values of a0, a1, and a2 are expected to agree with those
extracted from the Nautical Almanac within 0.1'.  It is unlikely, however, that all three will be off at
the same time.  Often, if one value is 0.1' too high another will be 0.1' too low, resulting in the
proper total correction  The calculated Zn should agree with the Nautical Almanac within 0.1°.

The Sight Planner tool calculates all values directly, but rounds azimuths and altitudes to whole degrees
before creating the list of visible bodies. Therefore it is possible for there to be a one degree error
in the values listed.

Altitude corrections: The calculated value of dip will agree with the Nautical Almanac dip tables for
values of height of eye up to 70.5 feet and 21.4 meters.  For greater heights of eye, generally not a
concern of the student, there are occasional discrepancies of 0.1'.  In the ranges of heights of eye of
8-10 feet and 2.4-3 meters, which are covered by both the interpolation and critical portions of the dip
table, the calculated value of dip will agree with the critical table.  (Note, for example, that the
interpolated and critical portions of the dip table disagree at 8.1, 8.2, 8.7, and 9.8 feet.)

Computed refraction (the Main altitude correction for the stars and planets, but affecting all bodies)
will agree with the Nautical Almanac for apparent altitudes greater than about 10°  (in Sight Reduction,
when Show Ho corrections as SR Form is selected) , and may be a few tenths of a minute off for lower
altitudes.  For non-standard temperature and pressure, the additional refraction correction may be as
much as several minutes off the Nautical Almanac value for very low altitudes.  (When Show Ho corrections
as Parameters is selected in Sight Reduction, there may be a larger difference for refraction.)  The
refraction corrections used by the Nautical Almanac changed in 2004.  For apparent altitudes less than
about 10°, Celestial Tools uses the formula from the Sight Reduction Procedures section of the Nautical
Almanac (which did not change until 2005), based on the Greenwich year derived from the date entered in
the data entry section of the form in use (Sight Reduction & Fix or Noon Sight).  (This is only a
significant factor for altitudes less than 2°.  However, this change also affected the critical values of
apparent altitude on the Altitude Corrections Table 10°-90°-Sun,Stars,Planets (Table A2), so care should
be taken to use the correct table when doing a manual calculation.)

The additional correction for the planets Venus and Mars (parallax) should agree with 1985 and later
Nautical Almanacs within 0.1.  Almanacs from 1952 to 1984 included a phase correction for Venus in
addition to parallax.  Since 1985 the phase correction has been incorporated in the tabulations for the
GHA and Dec.   Celestial Tools only considers parallax, so for Almanac years prior to 1985 a discrepancy
of a few tenths of an arc-minute can be expected in the additional correction for Venus.

For dip short, Celestial Tools uses the formula in recent (1981 or later) editions of Bowditch.  This
formula is exact for the refraction model adopted. Current JN and N course materials (and the back of the
SR form) use an approximate formula found in earlier editions of Bowditch, which matches the exact
formula in most cases, but differences, never exceeding 0.3', do appear for very short distances, and
there is an occasional difference of 0.1' elsewhere.  Because the approximate formula can develop
unacceptably large errors with large heights of eye coupled with short distances, it should not be used
if it results in a dip that exceeds 200' (3º20').

Regarding the altitude correction for the Sun, for a given limb and apparent altitude, the Almanac
Altitude Correction Tables use an average value of semi-diameter over each of the six-month periods
tabulated (and, on the bottom of the Sun column on each daily page, an average value of semi-diameter for
the three days covered by the page).  This allows a year's worth of corrections to occupy only a third of
a page, with a maximum error of only a few tenths of an arc minute.  In Sight Reduction and Noon Sight,
if Show Ho corrections as SR Form is selected, Celestial Tools will similarly use an average value of
semi-diameter.  If Show Ho corrections as Parameters is selected, Celestial Tools uses the actual date
and time in its computation.  Additionally, from 1954 through 1969, the Almanac included an irradiation
correction of -1.2' for the upper limb of the Sun, which is included in Celestial Tools.  The refraction
correction change of 2004 also affected the transition points of this table.  In all cases, the output of
Celestial Tools may not agree with that extracted from the Almanac.  If Show Ho corrections as SR form is
selected, expected worst case error is 0.1' compared to the Sun Altitude Correction Table or the semi-
diameter value at the bottom of the Sun column of the daily page.   If Show Ho corrections as Parameters
is selected, the values, though more accurate, may be in less agreement with the Almanac.  Whichever mode
is selected, the corresponding value of Ho is used in the Law of Cosines calculation.

The horizontal parallax (HP) of the Moon is expected to be within 0.1' of the value extracted from the
Nautical Almanac, and is based on the whole UT hour nearest to the time of observation, which could be
the hour following the observation.  (This is the method on page 280 of the Nautical Almanac, and in the
USPS Navigation Student Manual since N2009.)  The Main and Add'l corrections for the Moon are expected to
agree with the Nautical Almanac within 0.1 (using the refraction formula for the entered year).

Remember, though, that the purpose of Celestial Tools is not to do the student's work, but to provide an
aid in locating errors.

g. Data display "anomalies":  Versions of Celestial Tools prior to V4.0.0 used lower precision
algorithms, so, in order to avoid additional errors, for most tools, arithmetic was done to the full
precision of the computer, followed by rounding.  (An exception to this rule was Height of Eye, where
inches and centimeters were converted to feet and meters, respectively, which were then rounded to one
decimal place for dip calculation and display purposes.) Occasionally this resulted in the whole not
being equal to the sum of the parts.  Take, for example, 1.06 + 1.06.  If rounding to one decimal place
is done first, the result would be 1.1 + 1.1 = 2.2. If rounding to one decimal place is done last, you
would have 1.06 + 1.06 = 2.12, resulting in a display of 1.1 + 1.1 = 2.1.  With the improved accuracy of
V4.0.0, it was no longer felt that this was necessary.  Rounding is always done first, so the whole will
equal the sum of the parts.  When calculating estimated positions or fixes, the values of intercept and
azimuth are rounded to tenths of a nautical mile and whole degrees, respectively, before the calculations
are made, to more closely match a manual plot.

In versions of Celestial Tool prior to V4.0.0, it might also have been noticed that an angle calculated
by the program (one not entered by the user) in degrees and minutes might not equal its representation in
decimal degrees.  This was because the calculation was done in decimal degrees to the full precision of
the computer, then converted to degrees and minutes, followed by rounding the minutes to one decimal
place.  Again, with the improved accuracy of V4.0.0, the representation in decimal degrees will be
correct for the angle displayed in degrees and minutes.

One "anomaly" that has been retained in V4.0.0 and later is that, in most cases, the program does not
round a number for one displayed value then round it again for a subsequent displayed value.  This can
result in an "anomaly".  As an example, say Sight Reduction calculates a value for Z of N 49.51... W.
Rounded to one decimal place, this is displayed as N 49.5 W.  When this is converted to Zn, the unrounded
value of Z is rounded to whole degrees, displaying a Zn value of 310.  If the rounded value of Z were
used, a Zn value of 311 would be displayed.

For the SR Methods tool, this "anomaly" will not occur.  In order to match manual sight reductions,
intermediate values are rounded to the required precision then used in subsequent calculations.  A Z of N
49.5 W results in a Zn of 311.

h. Rounding:  Celestial Tools rounds by the method currently taught by the United States Power Squadrons,
"rounding upward".  For instance, if rounding to a whole number, 34.0-34.4 round to 34, and 34.5-34.9
round to 35.  In the past "rounding to the even", also known as "banker's rounding", a method still used
in some references, was used.  When using this method to round to a whole number, .5 is dropped if
preceded by an even number, but raising to the next whole number if preceded by an odd number.  For
instance, 34.5 would round to 34, but 35.5 would round to 36.

i. Printing:  All of the windows worth printing have a small button with an icon of a printer in the
upper right-hand corner below the Close button. Except for the case of the Help window, when this button
is activated, a bitmapped image of the window, including the title bar and border, is sent to the
selected printer.  For the Help window, the text alone is printed for all 20 topics (tabs) or any
individual topic.  Individual words, sentences, paragraphs, etc. can be cut and pasted into a text editor
or word processor (e.g. Windows Notepad) and printed from there.  With the exception of the Help, where
this does not apply, all portions of a window intended to be printed must be contained within the monitor
screen; offscreen portions will not be printed.

Printer selection is done from the main menu.  When the "Select Printer" button is activated, a window
with a drop-down list of available printers appears.  The default is the Windows default printer, but any
of the others can be selected.  The selected printer is active for all the tools of Celestial Tools, but
does not affect any other program.

j. Dates and times:  The default date is the system date.  It can be changed to any date from 1901 to
2099.  Invalid dates will produce an error message.

A note about Manual Zone Descriptions:  Although there are a limited number of locations that do not use
whole hours as their zone description, there is an even more limited number of hour values that are
associated with the two possible minute values, 30 and 45.  Nevertheless, Celestial Tools allows for any
hour value to be associated with those minute values.  Negative manual zone descriptions are entered by
putting a minus sign as the first character of the ZD h box.  If a ZD of -0h30m or -0h45m is desired, a
"-" or a "-0" should be entered in the ZD h box.  Positive manual zone descriptions will accept, but do
not requre, a "+".

k. Contact information:  Please send any comments, suggestions, or recommendations to harry_hammond@msn.com.

