NOON SIGHT

a. Purpose:  Calculate the zone time of Local Apparent Noon to the nearest second.  (This is done by the
GHA method.)  Calculate latitude from a noon sight.  Calculate latitude and longitude from observed zone
time of LAN.

b. Operation:  Required inputs for zone time of LAN are date and DR longitude.   Zone description is
automatically calculated based on longitude, but any civil standard time zone can be entered manually to
allow for time zones not based on longitude, or for Universal Time.  As a convenience feature, the UT
(GMT) option forces time outputs to be in Universal Time.  Check the "DST" box if the timepiece is set
for Daylight Savings Time.  Any of the entered values can be changed at any time and the calculations
redone.  Press the "Get Zone Time of LAN" button to complete the calculation.

In order to calculate latitude from a noon sight or longitude from observed zone time of LAN, the
Observed ZT of LAN must have a value.  It cannot be left blank. (The "Noon Sight" button will not appear
until there is a value.)  In the case of a noon sight for a sight folder, the zone description will be
correct, based on the entered longitude of the known position, and the ZT of LAN will be accurate.  If
this is done, that value will be automatically inserted into the "Observed ZT of LAN" box, but it can be
changed to the actual observed time, within the range of 111328 to 124427 (121328 to 134427 if "DST" is
checked) if Auto ZD is selected, the extreme values during the available years of the program at the far
west and east ends of a time zone.  (When Manual ZD or UT (GMT) is selected, the time can fall outside
this range.)  At sea, where DR longitude is just an estimate, the calculated ZT of LAN gives the
navigator an idea of when to be on deck to start a series of sights to determine the maximum altitude of
the sun (for latitude) and possibly the time of LAN (for longitude), a more difficult value to determine.
Watch time must be converted to zone time by applying watch error and zone description.  If zone time
then falls outside the specified range but can be corrected by adding or subtracting an integral number
of hours (probably just one hour, if the DR position is fairly accurate), then the zone description of
the timepiece does not match the actual time zone.  Adjust the hours to make this correction, and adjust
the zone description, using the Manual option, as required.  (If the timepiece is set for a non-whole-
hour civil zone description, not done at sea, the additional minutes must be taken into account.)

Additional required inputs for calculating latitude from a noon sight are azimuth of the sun (north or
south) or DR Latitude, sextant altitude, type of horizon (natural, artificial, or dip short), height of
eye, index error, and temperature and pressure (defaults are standard values).  (When using non-standard
temperature or pressure, when the unit is changed the value is set to the standard value for the new
unit.  If there is going to be a change in the units of temperature or pressure, it is recommended that
the units be changed before a value is entered.)  All the options available in the "Sight Reduction and
Fix" tool are available here.  If the calculated ZT of LAN is used for the Observed ZT of LAN, as would
be done when working from a known position, the program uses this value and the declination of the sun at
this time.  (It is unnecessary to enter the actual time of the sight since, even at the equinoxes, when
the declination of the sun is changing the fastest, there is no significant change in the declination of
the sun within 10 seconds of LAN, the previous allowable limit for USPS Sight Folders, currently 30
seconds.)  Press the "Noon Sight" button to complete the calculation.

Note for Artificial Horizons:  Although superimposing the Sun on itself is not recommended for artificial
horizon sights, as of V5.0.0 Celestial Tools permits this.  If Artificial Horizon are selected, an
additional choice, Center, appears in the Sun Limb box.  If this is chosen, the center of the Sun is used
in the calculation.  If Show Ho corrections as SR Form is selected, the altitude correction is done as it
would be done using the Nautical Almanac:  the main correction is obtained as if the body were a star or
planet, i.e. semi-diameter and parallax are not included.  (Parallax is not zero but is considered small
enough to be ignored.)  If Show Ho corrections as Parameters is selected, parallax is included.

Note for Dip Short sights:   For a given height of eye there is a dip short distance beyond which only
standard dip values (based only on height of eye) are required.  If the dip short distance exceed the
distance to the natural horizon for the entered height of eye, the program will automatically switch the
Horizon from Dip Short to Natural.   Note that entry of the numerical portion of Ds dist. is limited to
five characters, including a decimal point, which should cover all reasonable values.

Required inputs for calculating longitude from observed zone time of LAN are the date and zone
description of the timepiece (from the "Zone Time of LAN" section) plus the Observed ZT of LAN, the time
the sun reaches its highest point in the sky.  (Strictly speaking,  the maximum altitude does not
necessarily occur at meridian transit.  See the Accuracy/Resolution section below.)  This can best be
obtained from the average time of equal-altitude sights before and after LAN, or from a plot (or a curve-
fitting program) of a series of sights starting before and ending after LAN.  Keep in mind that all these
methods require accurate sights, which are difficult to obtain, especially during the times of year when
the altitude of the sun does not change much around LAN.

Press the "Noon Sight" button to complete the calculation.

Both latitude and longitude can be calculated from a noon sight without entering a DR latitude or DR
longitude.  Required inputs are the date and zone description of the timepiece (from the "Zone Time of
LAN" section), the Observed ZT of LAN, plus the sight and sextant data.  Press the "Noon Sight" button to
complete the calculation.

If there is any vessel movement with a significant north-south component during the time of a meridian
transit observation, the time at which maximum altitude is observed will not be the exact time that the
sun is directly on the vessel's meridian. This is because the rate of change of altitude due to the
vessel's motion is greater than the rate of change in altitude that would be observed from a stationary
position.

If you are only interested in longitude from observed zone time of LAN, it is not necessary to enter any
altitude data, but any one of the "At LAN" choices must be selected.  The resulting latitude calculation
can be ignored.

After activating the "Noon Sight" button, the program displays an "Altitude" box and a "Declination" box
like those of "Sight Reduction and Fix", plus a box showing the latitude computation.  If DR Latitude was
selected rather than the azimuth of the sun, the difference between the DR Latitude and the calculated
latitude is displayed.  It also displays a half meridian diagram illustrating the calculation.  On this
diagram, "O" is the sun, "Q" is the equator, and "Pn" or "Ps" is the elevated pole.

The longitude based on the observed zone time of LAN is also displayed at the bottom of the window.  If
the ZD is correct, the longitude from the observed ZT of LAN should be close to the calculated ZT of LAN.
It should also be noted that because the calculated ZT of LAN is rounded to the nearest second, if that
value is used to calculate longitude, the calculated longitude may disagree with the value of DR
longitude used to calculate the ZT of LAN by 0.1'.

The ability to determine longitude from the time of LAN, in fact from the time of meridian transit of any
of the 64 bodies included in the built-in almanac, has always been available in the Sight Reduction tool
of Celestial Tools.  See the Sight Reduction and Fix Help for how this is done.

If any of the data used to calculate the time of LAN is changed, all the calculated data disappears.
This is to prevent another calculation from being done with an incorrect time.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  See Help>General>"Almanac" Accuracy.

The computed time of LAN should agree with a manual calculation within one second.  (If the value of the
GHA Difference is exactly between two tabulated values of GHA Increment, the minute/second value
corresponding to the higher value is used.)  When Show Ho corrections as SR Form is selected, the
calculated latitude should be within 0.2' of the value obtained with a manual calculation using data from
the Nautical Almanac.  The longitude from the observed zone time of LAN should be within 0.2' of the
value obtained with a manual calculation using data from the Nautical Almanac.

Because of the differences in the ways the tabular (SR Form) corrections and the parameters for the Sun
are calculated, the results can be slightly different for the SR Form and Parameters options.  This
difference generally does not exceed 0.2'.  For the purposes of comparison to a manual reduction, the SR
Form option should be used.  Use the Parameters option only to see how the parameters change as the input
values are changed.

It should be noted that for bodies with a changing declination, such as the Sun, culmination (maximum
altitude) does not necessarily occur at meridian transit.  The time between culmination and meridian
transit is a function of latitude and time of year.  For the Sun, the time difference increases with
increasing latitude, and is greatest at the equinoxes, when the declination of the Sun is changing the
fastest, and is zero at the solstices.  At the equinoxes, the time difference is, in seconds,
approximately 15.3 x tan Lat.  In fact, even at the equinoxes, the difference in the altitude of the Sun
at culmination and at meridian transit does not reach 0.1' until the latitude reaches about 88°, where
the time difference is over seven minutes.  The recommendation of starting to take sights 10 to 20
minutes before the calculated time of meridian transit guarantees that the peak altitude will be seen,
and an accurate latitude can be determined.  However, the time of culmination cannot be used to determine
an accurate longitude.  The actual time of meridian passage, which is difficult to determine, must be
used.  But even at the equinoxes and 88º latitude, the time difference (7m18s), which amounts to 1°49.5'
of longitude, is only about 3.8 nautical miles.

