Purpose: To allow a person to input, update,  edit, delete, reduce (using SRF form), print, and store in external
text files logs of sights taken. This Sight Log form uses the same input fields, edits, and requirements as the Sight
Reduction Form (SRF), and the two can work in concert with Sight Log entries being 'reduced' by the SRF form and the
resulting intercept and azimuth transferred back to the Sight Log Form.

Special Windows Requirement for SightLog:
The short Date Format on your computer must be the following format  MM/dd/yyyy
To verify this open the Control Panel application & select Region to view the short date format.


SightLog Form work areas: 
1. Top of form: working sight data fields and control buttons 
2. Middle of form: Log of sights input and stored in a DataGrid. This area has scroll bars for up / down and 
right / left scrolling of the log of sights data area. 
3. Bottom of form: File buttons and Exit button. File buttons allow you to open, save, create new, and print the
current SightLog data visible in the DataGrid view. The Exit button allows a person to close out the open form 
and, if needed, save updated SightLog data in external text file.

Basic Work Flow 
1. Open SightLog form from the Celestial Tools Main Menu 
Either 
2.a. Open existing stored SightLog text files using the Open File button. Usually all saved SightLog files are 
found in the SightLogs folder that can be found inside the folder where the CelestialTools.exe file is stored. 
After opening an existing file, all sights will appear in the middle of the form log of sights. Once the log 
of sights data appears, you can select one sight and work on it in the top working area on the form. Once a 
sight is selected from log of sights area, its data will be transferred to the working fields
at the top of the form where you can update, delete, add another based on that sight, reduce, or share the sight
data. See later procedures in this document for these details. 
OR 
2.b. Start adding new working data in the fields at the top of the form, and when it is complete, click the 
Add Sight button to insert the working data in the log of sights area in the middle of the form. After sight 
data is added to the log of sights, it can be selected for further work. Once a sight is selected from log of 
sights area, its data will be transferred to the working fields at the top of the form where you can update, 
delete, add another based on that sight, or reduce the sight data entered. See later procedures in this document 
for these details. 
3. While a person is working on sight data at the top of the form, the working data can be reduced if the 
Reduce Sight button appears. Clicking this button will open the Sight Reduction form, transfer all sight log
data to the SRF form and have it reduced, and finally transfer the intercept and azimuth from the SRF back to 
working data area at the top of the Sight Log form. After reducing the sight log entry, other buttons to add, 
update, or delete can be clicked. 
4. There is also a options available in the SightLog Options box directly above the log of sights area in the
middle of the form. They do the following:
	4.a. hs/IE Format: A drop down box that allows DM or DMS format for hs and IE entries. Default is DM.
	4.b. Show Sight WT and hs Diff's: In the log of sights area in the middle of the form, starting with 
	the second sight, display the WT differences in second between the current and previous sight, and 
	display the hs difference in Degrees and Minutes between the current and previous sight. Default is 
	not selected.
	4.c. Automatically Reduce New/Chg'd sights: When set on (by clicking) all new or changed sights will
	automatically be reduced using the SRF form. The Reduce Sight button will not appear or become available
	when this option is set on. Default is set off (not clicked).
	4.d. Clear fields after new or updated sight: All input fields at the top of the screen are cleared
	aftr a new sight is input or an existing sight is updated with no errors.
	4.e. Display Sight GHA/Dec/Ho fields: Similar to the Show Sight WT and hs Diff's, this option will 
	display the GHA, Dec, and Ho from Sight Reduction Form for a reduced sight. Otherwise those fields
	are not displayed by default.

5. At any time when entering or evaluating sights, the contents of the log of sights area in the middle of the
form can be written to an external text file by using the Save sight Log Report button. 
6. If the Exit button is clicked, and updated but not saved information is contained in the log of sights area
in the middle of the form, you will be prompted to save the info if desired. You can bypass this option and exit
without saving. 
7. All of the Sight File Option buttons, except for the Print Sight Data, will present a standard Windows fill 
prompt and option dialog box with all file functionality available.
8. Clicking the Print Sight Data will bring up a standard Windows printer selection and print options dialog box
and allow you to print off the contents of the log of sights area.

Working Data Fields for data entry or working with sight:
Name: Free form text field that can contain the name of person or sight
Squadron: Fre form text field that can contain the squadron name, class, or similar data
Sight No.: Sequential number of sight. Protected field that is manipulated and maintained strictly by the 
	Sight Log Form
Sight Date / Watch Time: Integrated Windows data and time control where you can key in manually date and time 
	fields or you can selected the date from a drop down calendar control but still enter time fields. 
	Standard date and time edits are applied upon data entry. Default is the current date and time for the 
	computer you are using.
WE (mmss): Watch Error for the sight taken. Must be 4 digit numeric where valid minutes and seconds are entered
WE Type: Drop down control that allows selection of Fast or Slow for WE entered. Default is Fast.
ZD: Zone Description drop down control that allows an Auto ZD based on Longitude entered or manual selection of
	ZD. Default is Auto ZD.
DST: Day Light Savings Time selection box. Click / Select if the date / time entered is in DST time zone. Can be 
	selected automatically by date / time entered but this can be deselected if necessary. 
Body: Drop down control that allows the selection of the celestial body for the sight. Matches exactly the same 
	field on the SRF form. Default is the Sun.
Limb: Drop down control that allows the selection of the appropriate limb for the body entered: Upper, Lower, or 
	Center. Default is Lower.
DR Lat: Assumed current position Latitude in either Degree & Minutes or Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds. No default
DR Lat N/S: Drop control that allows the selection of whether the Latitude entered is North (N) or South (S). 
	Default is N.
DR Long: Assumed current position Longitude in either Degree & Minutes or Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds. No default
DR Long E/W: Drop down control that allows selection of whether Longitude entered is East (E) or West (W). Default
	is W.
IE: Index Error for Sextant entered using either DM or DMS format. No default.
IE Type: Drop down control that allows selection of whether the Index Error enterd is On the Arc or Off the Arc. 
	Default is On Arc (-).
HE: Height of eye for sight using the units entered in the next drop down field. No default
HE Type: Drop down control that allows selection of the HE units.
Horizon: Drop down control that allows selection of horizon type and if necessary the distance and units to the 
	horizon. No defaults.
Apprx Bearing: Drop down control that allows selection of the approximate bearing of the sight; required field but 
	no default
SR Intercept and Azimuth: Protected text field that will be filled in after a sight is reduced using the SRF form. 
	It will contain a text statement of the interecept distance and the azimuth direction of the results of the
	sight reduction.
SR EP: Protected text field that will be filled in aftr a sight is reduced using the SRF form with a text statement
	of the estimate SR EP Lat and Long.
Remarks: Free form text field that can contain anything desired to explain or augment the sight data entered. No
	default; not required.
	
Sight Activity Buttons:
Add Sight - Add a new sight to the sight log data with the error free input fields
Update Sight - This button appears when an existing sight is selected. When clicked, the sight data in the 
	input fields will be updated in the sight log
Delete Sight - This button appears when an existing sight is selected. When clicked, it causes the sight 
	selected to be deleted from the sight log.
Clear Fields - This button appears when an exisitng sight is selected. When clicked, it causes the input 
	fields to be cleared of all data.

Sight Reduction - This button appears when an existing sight is selected. When clicked, it sends all of the 
	data from the input fields to the Sight Reduction Form input fields, the sight data to be reduced using
	the SRF form, and the resulting Intercept (a), Azimuth (Zn), GHA, Dec, and Ho to be transferred back
	into the sight log.
Alt SR Method - This button appears whenever the GHA, Dec, and Ho data is formatted from a reduced sight. When
	clicked, it sends all input data including the GHA, Dec, and Ho to be sent to the Alternate SR Method
	form. The user can then click the appropriate reduction methods of the 8 visible there. No data is 
	transferred back into the sight log.
Noon Sight Form - This button appears when the selected sight is a Sun sight. When clicked, it causes the input 
	data fields to be pushed to the Noon Sight Planner form and the Noon Sight processing to be executed. No 
	data is transferred back into the Sight Log.

	


