SIGHT REDUCTION & FIX

a. Purpose:  Completely reduce a sight to intercept and azimuth; calculate estimated position; use two
more reduced sights to establish a fix; calculate latitude from altitude of Polaris (or do a full
reduction of a Polaris sight).

b. Operation:  Required inputs are celestial body (default is Sun L.L.), DR latitude (except when
determining latitude by altitude of Polaris) and longitude, date, watch time (24-hour format), watch
error, zone description, sextant altitude, type of horizon (natural, artificial, or dip short), height of
eye, index error, and temperature and pressure (defaults are standard values).

If the selected celestial body is the Sun, two options are presented.  "NA val. of hourly GHA/d" (the
default) calculates the value of the GHA of the Sun as presented on the daily pages of the Nautical
Almanac (a value that "is deliberately adjusted by up to 0.15' to reduce the error due to ignoring the v-
correction"), and agrees with the Nautical Almanac in almost all cases.  (This is the way Sun reductions
would normally be done using the Nautical Almanac.)  It also calculates the d value using an "average" of
the three days shown on the Nautical Almanac page.  "Accurate val. of hourly GHA/d" calculates the value
of the GHA of the Sun without the Nautical Almanac's adjustment, and applies the v-value and v-correction
that would be used if the Nautical Almanac included v-values for the Sun, and the existing Increments and
Corrections.  It also calculates the d value based on the date and time of the sight.

If the selected celestial body is a star other than Polaris, two options are presented.  "NA val. of SHA/
Dec" (the default) calculates the SHA and declination of the star as presented on the daily pages of the
Nautical Almanac, i.e. based on UT 1200 of the middle day of the page.  "Accurate val. of SHA/Dec"
calculates the SHA and declination of the star based on the date and time of the sight.

If the selected celestial body is Polaris, two options are presented.  "Latitude by altitude of Polaris"
(the default) calculates latitude as with the Polaris (Pole Star) Tables in the Nautical Almanac.  "Full
reduction of Polaris sight" reduces the sight as is done with the 57 other stars.

If the selected celestial body is a planet, two options are presented.  "NA val. of v/d" (the default)
calculates the v value, v correction, d value, and d correction as presented on the daily pages of the
Nautical Almanac, i.e. based on an "average" of the three days on the page.  "Accurate val. of v/d"
calculates the v value, v correction, d value, and d correction based on the date and time of the sight.

Sextant altitude and index error can be entered in either degrees and decimal minutes (DM.m) or degrees,
minutes, and seconds (DMS).  Off the arc index error can be entered as either the actual reading from the
sextant ("off the arc (rdg.)") or the calculated value ("off the arc (val.)"); the program makes the
appropriate adjustment when calculating index correction.  (The degree value should always be read to the
right of the index mark.  Take, for example, an off the arc reading between 1 and 2 degrees and a
micrometer drum reading of 22.3'.  This can be entered as either 2°22.3' off the arc (rdg.) or as 1°37.7'
off the arc (val.).  Either will give an index correction of +1°37.7.)  Zone description is automatically
calculated based on longitude, but any civil standard time zone can be entered manually to allow for time
zones not based on longitude, or for Universal Time.  As a convenience feature, the UT (GMT) option
allows Universal Time to be entered directly, with a ZD of 0.  Check the "DST" box if the timepiece is
set for Daylight Savings Time.  Any of the entered values can be changed at any time and the calculations
redone.  Unnecessary inputs are not requested; e.g. if you are doing an artificial horizon reduction, you
will not be asked for height of eye.  Reductions, except for latitude by altitude of Polaris, can be
saved, using the "Save for Fix" button, and the last twelve saved are retained.

There is also a place for an optional Sight Number (0 to 99).

It will work for natural, artificial, and dip short horizons; any reasonable temperature or pressure; and
any sextant altitude up to 150°.  Sights with apparent altitudes greater than 90° are automatically
treated as back sights.  It will accept height of eye in feet, inches, meters, or centimeters; distance
to dip short horizon in feet, yards, meters, statute miles, or nautical miles; temperature in Fahrenheit
or Centigrade, and pressure in inches of mercury or millibars.  (When using non-standard temperature or
pressure, when the unit is changed the value is set to the standard value for the new unit.  If there is
going to be a change in the units of temperature or pressure, it is recommended that the units be changed
before a value is entered.)

Note for Artificial Horizons:  Although superimposing the Sun or Moon on itself is not recommended for
artificial horizon sights, as of V5.0.0 Celestial Tools permits this.  If either the Sun or Moon, LL or
UL, and Artificial Horizon are selected, a checkbox, Use superimposed AH images, appears below the Body
selection.  If this is checked, the limb selection is ignored, and the center of the Sun or Moon is used
in the calculation.  In the case of the Sun, if Show Ho corrections as SR Form is selected, the altitude
correction is done as it would be done using the Nautical Almanac:  the main correction is obtained as if
the body were a star or planet, i.e. semi-diameter and parallax are not included.  (Parallax is not zero
but is considered small enough to be ignored.)  If Show Ho corrections as Parameters is selected,
parallax is included.  In the case of the Moon,  if Show Ho corrections as SR Form is selected, the
altitude correction is done as it would be done using the Nautical Almanac:  the main correction is taken
from the upper Moon table, the additional correction is calculated from one half the upper plus lower
corrections from the lower Moon table, and an additional 15' is subtracted because the Moon tables are
based on lower limb values.  (The line of the SR form that normally says "UL ( -30.0'" is replaced by "AH
( superimp.".)  If Show Ho corrections as Parameters is selected, semi-diameter and augmentation are not
included.

Note for Dip Short sights:   For a given height of eye there is a dip short distance beyond which only
standard dip values (based only on height of eye) are required.  If the dip short distance exceed the
distance to the natural horizon for the entered height of eye, the program will automatically switch the
Horizon from Dip Short to Natural.   Note that entry of the numerical portion of Ds dist. is limited to
five characters, including a decimal point, which should cover all reasonable values.

Once all the data is entered, press the "Reduce Sight" button to perform the sight reduction.

Intercept and azimuth are found using the SR96 version of the USPS "calculator" implementation of the Law
of Cosines, and data is displayed on a form similar to, but not exactly like, the USPS Sight Reduction
Form SR96b.  In the Altitude box, there is the option of showing the corrections from ha to Ho as they
would be shown on the SR Form (Main, Add'l, etc.) or as the parameters they actually are - usually
refraction, parallax, and semi-diameter - but shown to three decimal places in order to more easily see
what is actually changing as the inputs are changed.  (For the Moon, the semi-diameter shown is the
geocentric semi-diameter, as would be measured by an imaginary observer at the center of the Earth, and
is independent of the altitude of the Moon.  Augmentation of the semi-diameter of the Moon is the
correction that makes the semi-diameter topocentric, as would be measured by an observer on the surface
of the Earth, and increases with increasing altitude of the Moon.  Augmentation always makes the semi-
diameter of the Moon larger at altitude than it is on the horizon.)  (Parallax is shown for the planets,
but it is not included in the calculation of Ho, since planets are treated as point sources when viewed
through a sextant telescope.)  (Note that changing this option has the same effect as activating the
"Reduce Sight" button: the output display area is updated.)  There is an option to use non-standard
temperature and pressure values.  Everything is calculated; there is no need to consult an almanac.  The
Law of Cosines is the preferred sight reduction method because it indicates the quality of a sight taken
from a known position without plotting.

After a minimum of two sights are reduced and saved, you have the option of establishing a fix, with the
"Establish Fix" button, using sights selected from the list of up to twelve.  The time of the fix is the
time of the latest sight selected.  (At sea, if the time between the earliest and latest sights is more
than 20 minutes, the fix should be considered a Running Fix.)  In addition to the latitude and longitude
of the fix, the distance (rounded to tenths of a nautical mile) and bearing (rounded to whole degrees)
from the DR to the fix will be displayed.  (Note:  When using Manual ZD (or DST), many combinations of
watch time, watch error, and zone description will result in the same UT, the time that is used to
calculate the positions of the bodies. The Fix window will always show the zone time resulting from watch
time and watch error.  In order to avoid any confusion, the same zone description should be used for all
related sights in a group.)

Caution:  Versions of Celestial Tools prior to V2.3.0 had a bug that prevented some valid sets of sights
from establishing a fix.  This bug has been removed, with the consequence that almost any set of sights
will produce a fix, regardless of cut or length of intercept.  It is left to the user to select
appropriate sights.

After each reduction is done, a "Meridian Diagram" button becomes available.  Pressing this button opens
another window showing the Projection on the Plane of the Celestial Meridian, based on the values in the
reduction.  There is the option of representing the hour circles and vertical circles as accurate
ellipses (default) or as less accurate arcs of circles.  Vertical circles and hour circles are solid of
the body is to the west, dashed if to the east.

Construction lines for both the hour circle and vertical circle are shown.  The position of the body is
represented by a dot, which is located at the intersection of the parallel of altitude and the parallel
of declination, regardless of the hour circle or vertical circle.   If circles are used, the hour circle
and vertical circle are forced to pass through the body, and the plotted values of LHA and Zn may not
agree with the calculated values.  With good input data, the differences are not expected to exceed 4
degrees.  When ellipses are used, if the input data is good, the hour circle and vertical circle should
intersect at (or at least near) the intersection of the parallel of altitude and parallel of declination.
If not, look for an error in the data input, which would probably also have caused an excessively large
intercept value.  Since when circles are used the hour circle and vertical circle are forced to pass
through the intersection of the parallel of altitude and parallel of declination, the quality of the
input data cannot be judged.  The graphics associated with each parameter are color-coded; the color
legend appears in the upper left corner of the window.  This tool is shared with the SR Methods & Fix
tool, and will use the data from the last reduction done with either of the two.  The "Meridian Diagram"
button is enabled only once for each reduction.  To enable it again, the "Reduce Sight" button must be
pressed.  However, if the Meridian Diagram windows is already opened, switching between "Ellipses" and
"Circles" will create a meridian diagram based on the last reduction done.  To use new values, the
"Reduce Sight" button must be pressed again.

The Time Diagram uses the following symbols:  V = Aries; ( = moon; P = planet; O = mean Sun; o = apparent
Sun; * = star.  For sun sights, the position of the apparent Sun is shown.  For all other bodies (except
Polaris when doing Latitude by Altitude of Polaris), the position of the mean Sun is shown. However, when
the EqT (Equation of Time) button, located in the lower right corner of the Time Diagram box (except when
doing Latitude by Altitude of Polaris), is pressed and held (mouse only, no keyboard control) the "other"
Sun (mean Sun for Sun sights, apparent Sun for sights on all other bodies) will appear on the Time
Diagram, and the value of the Equation of Time (to be applied to mean time to get apparent time) will
appear in the lower left corner of the Time Diagram box.

The Latitude by Altitude of Polaris calculation requires an approximate latitude (the Nautical Almanac
Polaris tables show ten degree increments at low latitudes, five degree increments at middle latitudes,
and two degree increments at high latitudes).  The program uses DR latitude as the approximate latitude
unless the DR latitude degrees and minutes are both left blank (e.g. no confidence in your DR latitude),
in which case the calculated value of Ho is used.  (If your DR latitude is truly on the equator, entering
a single zero in either the degrees or minutes box of DR L will suffice.)  If Ho is used and it exceeds
68°59.9', it is considered outside the range of the Polaris Tables, and the calculation will be aborted.
If a DR latitude is entered, the program displays the difference between the computed latitude and the DR
latitude.  The Estimated Position is the calculated latitude and the DR longitude.

A "hidden" feature is the ability to determine longitude from the time of meridian transit of any of the
included bodies.  Enter the date, the observed time of meridian transit, and the body.  Activate the
"Reduce Sight" button.  If the resulting GHA is less than 180°, the GHA equals west longitude.  If the
resulting GHA is greater than 180°, subtract it from 360° to get east longitude.  See the Noon Sight Help
for other information about this method.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  See Help>General>"Almanac" Accuracy.

The accuracy of the built-in almanac and formulas makes the program more than adequate for practical
offshore navigation (don't forget - never rely on any one navigation method), but it should only be used
as a gross check of a JN or N sight reduction form.  If you are using this tool as a quick check of the
quality of the sights for a sight folder, these errors should be considered before accepting or rejecting
a sight.  If there is any question, fill out the top of the SR form using the Almanac, then use the Law
of Cosines part of the SR Methods tool to get intercept and azimuth accurately.  In any case, the program
should be very helpful in locating major errors.  But remember, the values calculated by this tool should
not be used in a sight folder.

Compared to a manual reduction, the error in intercept is typically 0.2 nm or less, but is a function of
the errors in GHA, declination, and Ho, and the azimuth of the body.   For the form of the Law of Cosine
used, the azimuth of bodies near the zenith will not be accurate.

Because of the differences in the ways the tabular (SR Form) corrections and the parameters for the Moon
are calculated, the results can be slightly different for the SR Form and Parameters options.  This
difference generally does not exceed 0.1'.  For the purposes of comparison to a manual reduction, the SR
Form option should be used, though the Parameters option may be more accurate.  Note that the parallax is
based on the apparent altitude corrected for refraction and semi-diameter, not on computed altitude.  A
similar situation exists for Sun sights.  Use the Parameters option only to see how the parameters change
as the input values are changed.

The whole hour Moon "paradox":  Regarding v and d values and corrections, the Explanation section of the
Nautical Almanac makes no procedural distinction between sights taken on the hour and those with minutes
and/or seconds - if the body uses them, they should be applied.  For most bodies this does not matter,
but in the case of the Moon, where the v and d values often exceed 5.9', resulting in v and d corrections
of 0.1' (possibly 0.2' for a v or d value of 18.0'), this can create a "paradox".  If the non-zero
correction is added to the hour value taken from the daily page, the Tot GHA will not be the same as the
hour value, even though there are no minutes or seconds.  The 1995 and 2002 editions of the American
Practical Navigator ("Bowditch") do an example of a whole hour Moon reduction.  In that example, the v
and d corrections are applied.  However, according to Catherine Hohenkerk of HM Nautical Almanac Office,
although it is not clearly stated in the Explanation, when the hours and minutes are zero there is no
need to go into the Increments and Corrections at all.  Sean Urban, Chief of the USNO Nautical Almanac
Office, agrees with this, and is also of the opinion that using an example exactly on the hour was a poor
choice.  Celestial Tools will not show increment values or v or d values or corrections for sights taken
on the hour.

The  EP L and EP Lo should agree with a careful plot within 0.1'.  A two-body fix should agree fairly
well with a plot, but a three- (or more) body fix may not agree that well with a plot because of the
uncertainty in determining the fix position of the plot.  Keep in mind that you should expect a small
difference between the calculated fix and a plotted fix if the plotted fix was established with a sight
reduction method that plots from APs (e.g. the Nautical Almanac Sight Reduction method) rather than one
that plots from DRs (Law of Cosines in the Sight Reduction tool).

The value of the Equation of Time should be accurate to within two seconds.

