SIGHT REDUCTION METHODS & FIX

a. Purpose:  Allows data extracted from the Nautical Almanac (rather than from the built-in medium-
precision almanac) to be entered for sight reductions using various methods.  (In keeping with the spirit
of Celestial Tools as being an instructional aid rather than doing the work for the student, this module
is  intended, for most methods, to be only a little more than Windows executable versions of DOS programs
and spreadsheets already available on the USPS web site.)  The methods included are the Law of Cosines
(LoC) calculator method, the Nautical Almanac Concise method (NASR), Pub. 249 (formerly H.O. 249, Sight
Reduction Tables for Air Navigation, A.P. 3270 in the United Kingdom), Pub. 229 (formerly H.O. 229, Sight
Reduction Tables for Marine Navigation, H.D. 486 in the United Kingdom), H.O. 214 (Tables of Computed
Altitude and Azimuth), H.O. 211 (Dead Reckoning Altitude and Azimuth Table, Third Edition, known as
Ageton, and the Modified H.O. 211 Compact Sight Reduction Table, known as Ageton-Bayless), H.O. 208
(Navigation Tables for Mariners and Aviators, Sixth Edition, known as Dreisonstok), two versions of the
S-Table, and the Weems Line of Position Book.

(Over the years the USPS SR forms for the same sight reduction method have changed in their layout,
operation, and Zn resolution.  Celestial Tools SR "forms" are patterned after the following USPS SR
forms:  Law of Cosines - SR 96a; NASR - SR 96a; Pub. 249 - SR Pub. 249 Vol II & III; Pub. 229 - SR 96b;
H.O. 211 - SR 87, with the exception regarding Zn noted in Accuracy/Resolution.  The form for H.O. 214 is
patterned as a combination of the H.O. 214 form of SR 712 and the Pub. 229 form of SR 96b.  The form for
H.O. 208 is patterned after the examples in the sixth edition of the H.O. 208 book.)

Calculates an Estimated Position (EP) for all methods. Calculates an AP/EP and a DR-LOP distance for all
methods that use an Assumed Position (AP) rather than a Dead Reckoning (DR) position.  (See below for how
EP and AP/EP are defined.)  Use two more sights reduced by the Law of Cosines method to establish a fix.

b. Operation:  Required inputs are GHA or LHA (Tot GHA or LHA from SR form), declination (Dec from SR
form), observed altitude (Ho from SR form), and DR latitude and longitude (if GHA is being used).  To use
LHA instead of GHA, enter LHA in place of GHA and set DR Lo to zero or leave blank.  (Be aware that doing
this will give an EP, and an AP/EP if applicable, referred to 0° longitude.)  Time is only required if it
is intended to establish a fix from a moving vessel.  (The time value need not be accurate.  It is only
used to determine which is the latest of the selected sights so the earlier sights can be advanced to its
DR position.)  Select one of the eight sight reduction method buttons and the corresponding sight
reduction will be displayed in the format required by the SR form (where the format of the form is
known).

GHA has an upper limit of 719°59.9' in case Tot GHA from the SR form exceeds 360° and has not been
adjusted.

The NASR method is not suitable for values of Ho exceeding 75°.  The Law of Cosines is not suitable for
values of Ho exceeding 88°.  Pub. 229 requires a special interpolation technique for Ho values of 86° or
greater that is not included in this program. The corresponding buttons will be disabled if the entered
value of Ho exceeds these limits.

Ho has a lower limit of -59.9', so sights on bodies on the visible horizon (with a negative altitude on
the celestial horizon) and heights of eye up to about 75 feet can be reduced.  If a negative value of
minutes of Ho is entered, any value of degrees of Ho will be cleared and the Ho degrees box will be
disabled.

When using the standard procedure for determining Asm Lo and Asm LHA with the NASR method, if the
difference between Asm Lo and DR Lo is exactly 30', there are two possible correct sets of values that
can be derived.  Celestial Tools is configured to give the set with the value of Asm LHA closer to the
actual value of LHA.

For the NASR method, after the "NASR" button is activated the user can select whether to use the
Auxiliary Table found in the pre-1999/post-2004 Nautical Almanacs or that found in the 1999-2004 Nautical
Almanacs.  The default is the pre-1999/post-2004 set.  Whenever this option is changed, the calculation
is done without having to activate the "NASR" button.

A little explanation is in order.  In the late 1990s, USPS produced its own version of the Auxiliary
Table, called the "ALTITUDE CORRECTION TABLE for The Nautical Almanac Sight Reduction Table".  Its
purpose was twofold.  It had a revised format which made it easier to determine the signs of the
corrections, and it "corrected" the tabulated values of corr1 and corr2 to match what would be derived
from using a calculator and applying standard rounding techniques. (The single row that did not conform
to this design in the Auxiliary Table was the values for P 30° and Z2 60°.  The Auxiliary Table values
for corr1 are one less than the USPS version values when P° is 30 and F' is odd.  The Auxiliary Table
values for corr2 are one less than the USPS version values when Z2° is 60 and A' is odd.)  This table was
well-received, and replaced the original Auxiliary Table starting with the 1999 Nautical Almanac.
However, starting in 2005, the Nautical Almanac maintained the improved format of the USPS version, but
went back to the "uncorrected" values of corr1 and corr2.

The NASR method program is capable of producing results outside the range of the tables, generally for
objects that have a negative altitude, i.e. below the horizon.  This is not of significant interest to
mariners.

For the Law of Cosines, the Estimated Position (EP) is the point at the end of the intercept line through
which goes the line of position.  For all methods that use an AP rather than a DR, this point is not the
Estimated Position as normally defined, since the intercept starts at an Assumed Position (AP) instead of
at a DR position or a Known Position (KP), and is called AP/EP in Celestial Tools to distinguish it from
a normal EP.  (It is only valid from a fixed position, not from a moving vessel.  One of the rhumb line
methods of The Sailings can be used to advance an AP/EP.)  In either case, this point should be useful in
checking the accuracy of a plot.  For NASR, the DR-LOP distance is also shown, which, if the DR position
is a known position (KP), is a measurment of the quality of the sight.  From this, the real EP,  the
point on the LOP closest to the DR position, is calculated and displayed.  These results will not
necessarily match those obtained by the Law of Cosines because of the difference in precision and
rounding and the skewing of the LOP if there is sufficient difference in the azimuths derived by the two
methods.

For Pub. 249, the program should operate properly even outside the declination range of 29°N to 29°S of
the tables.

For Pub. 229, the DSD value and correction are generally only needed for values of Hc greater than 60°
and certain conditions of latitude, declination, and LHA.  After the "Pub. 229" button is activated, an
"Always use DSD" checkbox will appear in the data display area, next to "Pub 229".   If this box is
unchecked (the default), the DSD value and correction will only be included if the DSD correction exceeds
0.25'.  This should correspond to the tabular values of d printed in italic type followed by a small dot.
If it is checked, the DSD value and correction will be included whether it is needed or not.  If the DSD
value and correction are needed, the checkbox will be disabled.  (Checking or unchecking this box has the
same effect as activating the "Pub. 229" button:  the output display area is updated.)

For H.O. 211, after the "H.O. 211" button is activated the user can select whether to use Original
(Ageton) or Compact (Ageton-Bayless) tables.  The default is the Compact tables.  (The original tables
included entries for half-minutes of arc, which were deleted from the compact tables.) (Note that
changing this option has the same effect as activating the "H.O. 211" button:  the output display area is
updated.)  For the Original tables, meridian angle t and declination must be at least 0.3'.  For the
Compact tables, meridian angle t and declination must be at least 0.5'.

H.O. 211 has a "forbidden zone", generally considered to be where K is between 82° and 98° (though some
sources have smaller ranges), where an intercept error of up to 30 miles may result (less if
interpolation of the tables is used).  The USPS recommendation is to discard the sight.  However, if K is
between 82° and 98°, Celestial Tools will interpolate (actually calculate) for the second B value.  When
this occurs, either with the Compact or Original Tables, a message will appear indicating this, and
giving the option of using the Sadler Technique, a modified form of H.O. 211 for use in the "forbidden
zone", which gives more accurate results.  For the Sadler Technique with the Original tables, meridian
angle t must be at least 0.3' away from 90°.  With the  Compact tables, meridian angle t must be at least
0.5' away from 90°.

For H.O. 214, after the "H.O. 214" button is activated the user can select one of three possible
solutions: 1) Solution for line of position, using delta d correction.  This is the primary method for
which the tables were originally designed, and is the default.  The solution is short and simple,
essentially being plotted from an assumed (AP) latitude and longitude.  (The AP/EP is referenced to Asm L
and Asm Lo.) 2) Solution for line of position, using both delta d and delta t corrections.  This is used
if it is desired to plot from an AP latitude and a DR longitude.  (The AP/EP is referenced to Asm L and
DR Lo.) 3) Solution for position line from the DR position using delta d, delta t, and delta L.  (No AP/
EP or DR-LOP distance will be shown.) (Note that changing this option has the same effect as activating
the "H.O. 214" button:  the output display area is updated.)  H.A. is the equivalent of meridian angle t.
The use of delta t is not in general recommended when the altitude of the observed body is greater than
80°, but it will be included in the solution nevertheless.  The azimuth obtained from the tables is
correct for the values with which the tables were entered, and for plotting lines of position generally
need no correction.  If more accuracy is desired, the azimuth may be interpolated, but this will not be
done by Celestial Tools.

For H.O. 208, the assumed LHA (the LHA to the nearest whole degree) cannot be 0° or 180°.  When high
altitudes are observed near mereidian transit, selecting an assumed position to fit the tables may
produce an appreciable error in azimuth.  Under these circumstances, interpolation to minutes of latitude
is recommended, but will not be done by Celestial Tools.  Note that for H.O. 208, for a latitude of zero,
the name of the latitude in the data entry section is automatically changed to the name of the
declination regardless of how it was originally set.

Two versions of the S-Table are provided:  the original (the default), by Mike Pepperday, which was
included in the Nautical Almanac for a few years in the early '90s, and is still available as a booklet;
and a modified version, by Rodger E. Farley, available in his book "Celestial Navigation in a Teacup"
(formerly "The Armchair Celestial Navigator").  Both versions are derivatives of H.O. 211, and, as such,
also have a "forbidden zone"  where K is between 82° and 98°, which is handled in the same manner as in
H.O. 211 .  The worksheeet for the Pepperday version as shown in the Nautical Almanac and the booklet is
very similar to the H.O. 211 worksheet.  (Pepperday revised it to an improved version after the
publication of the booklet, but it was never published.)  The Farley version uses an original worksheet.
In both cases Celestial Tools uses a worksheet similar to that of H.O. 211, but with the nomenclature
changed to agree with the particular version being used.

The Farley version uses + for N and W, and - for S and E.  It also uses an unconventional definition of
LHA, similar to meridian angle t.  For example, if LHA is 350°, it will be shown as -10°.  The Farley
version also does not mention the interpolation requirement where the value of the derived parameter K is
near 90° (as in H.O. 211), but there is an implication in the example in the book that "eyeball
interpolation" should always be done for any parameter.  (The Pepperday version specifically says not to
bother using anything but the nearest tabulated value except in the case of K near 90°.) Celestial Tools,
however, is programmed so that interpolation is only done when the K value is from 82° to 98°.

For the Weems Line of Position Book, after the "Weems LPB" button is activated, an "Interpolate Table B"
checkbox will appear in upper left corner of the data display area.   If this box is unchecked (the
default), the value of K~d is rounded to the nearest whole minute before calculating the value of B, and
Hc is rounded to whole minutes, as was done in examples in the second (and, it is believed, the first)
edition of the book.  If it is checked, the value of K~d to tenths of a minute is used for calculating
the value of B, and Hc is rounded to tenths of minutes, as was done in examples in the third (and, it is
believed, the fourth) edition of the book.  This checkbox is only associated with the calculation of Hc,
to the left of the vertical dotted line. (Checking or unchecking this box has the same effect as
activating the "Weems LPB" button:  the output display area is updated.)  All editions of the Weems Line
of Position Book used Rust's Azimuth Diagram to determine Z and Zn.  The third and fourth editions added
a tabular method for that purpose.  Celestial Tools displays Z and Zn, calculated from the formula from
which the Rust diagram was constructed, to the left of the vertical dotted line on the display.  The
tabular method is shown to the right of the vertical dotted line.  Interpolation of Table B is never
used:  the table is entered with angles rounded to whole minutes, and B values are extracted rounded to
units.  (Note that in cases where it might not be clear, the table used (A or B) is embedded in the arrow
symbols, and whether the table is entered from the top or bottom is indicated.)  It should be noted that
this method uses an unconventional definition of azimuth angle (Z).  The prefix is determined by whether
the body is north or south of the observer, and the maximum value is 90°, where in most methods the
prefix is the elevated pole, and the maximum value is 180°.  (In all methods the suffix is determined by
whether the body is east or west of the observer.)

Although examples in some books indicate that this is not required, in all sight reduction methods that
use an assumed longitude to calculate a whole degree value of LHA, Celestial Tools will always select an
assumed longitude that is within 30' of the DR longitude.  This will result in a whole-degree value of
assumed LHA that is closest to the actual LHA.

In all sight reduction methods that plot from an assumed longitude, if the DR longitude is close to 0° or
180°, the assumed longitude might not be in the same hemisphere as the DR longitude.  In those cases, the
standard form ofassumed longitude will be displayed, with the appropriate operation.  For example, If the
DR longitude is 0°20'W and the GHA is 0°50', Celestial Tools will display the assumed longitude as (-)
0°10'E rather than (+) 359°50'W.

When switching from one sight reduction method to another, or after pressing "Clear All" or "Clear except
DR", any options will be left in the state they were last in.

Reductions by the Law of Cosines method can be saved (there is no provision for doing this with any of
the other methods), using the "Save for Fix" button, and the last twelve saved are retained.  After a
minimum of two sights are reduced by the Law of Cosines method and saved, you have the option of
establishing a fix, with the "Establish Fix" button, using sights selected from the list of up to twelve.

If taking sights from a moving vessel, the  times of the sights must be entered, only accurate enough to
establish the chronological order of the sights. (Sights with times and without times cannot be mixed.)
The time of the fix is the time of the latest sight selected.  (At sea, if the time between the earliest
and latest sights is more than 20 minutes, the fix should be considered a Running Fix.)  Do not use times
that cross midnight.  Adjust times to avoid this; the times only need to correctly represent
chronological order.  If sights are taken from a fixed position, e.g. from a Known Position (KP) when
taking sights for a sight folder, the times are not required, but all sights selected for the fix must
have the same DR position.  Keep in mind that you should expect a small difference between the calculated
fix and a plotted fix if the plotted fix was established with a sight reduction method that plots from an
Assumed Position (AP) (e.g. the Nautical Almanac Sight Reduction method) rather than one that plots from
a DR position (Law of Cosines in Celestial Tools).  (Although Celestial Tools has no provision to
establish a fix from sights taken by any method other than the Law of Cosines, reducing these sights with
the Law of Cosines should result in a fix that is relatively close to what would be established using
other reduction methods.  Fixes established from methods that plot from an assumed position, even if from
a moving vessel, should be within one nautical mile or so from the fix established by the Law of
Cosines.)  In addition to the latitude and longitude of the fix, the distance and bearing from the DR to
the fix will be displayed.

To include a Noon Sight as part of the list of sights saved for a fix, use the Ho, Dec, and L from the
Noon Sight.  Set LHA equal to zero by setting GHA equal to LoW or 360-LoE.  Reduce the sight with the
"Law of Cosines" button, then save it with the "Save for Fix" button.

Caution:  Versions of Celestial Tools prior to V2.3.0 had a bug that prevented some valid sets of sights
from establishing a fix.  This bug was removed, with the consequence that almost any set of sights will
produce a fix, regardless of cut or length of intercept.  It is left to the user to select appropriate
sights.

After each reduction is done a "Meridian Diagram" button becomes available.  Pressing this button opens
another window showing the Projection on the Plane of the Celestial Meridian, based on the values in the
reduction.  There is the option of representing the hour circles and vertical circles as accurate
ellipses (default) or as less accurate arcs of circles.  Vertical circles and hour circles are solid of
the body is to the west, dashed if to the east. Construction lines for both the hour circle and vertical
circle are shown.  The position of the body is represented by a dot, which is located at the intersection
of the parallel of altitude and the parallel of declination, regardless of the hour circle or vertical
circle.  If circles are used, the hour circle and vertical circle are forced to pass through the body,
and the plotted values of LHA and Zn may not agree with the calculated values.  With good input data, the
differences are not expected to exceed 4 degrees.  When ellipses are used, if the input data is good, the
hour circle and vertical circle should intersect at (or at least near) the intersection of the parallel
of altitude and parallel of declination.  If not, look for an error in the data input, which would
probably also have caused an excessively large intercept value.  Since when circles are used the hour
circle and vertical circle are forced to pass through the intersection of the parallel of altitude and
parallel of declination, the quality of the input data cannot be judged.  The graphics associated with
each parameter are color-coded; the color legend appears in the upper left corner of the window.  This
tool is shared with the Sight Reduction & Fix tool, and will use the data from the last reduction done
with either of the two.  The "Meridian Diagram" button is enabled only once for each reduction.  To
enable it again, the "Law of Cosines" or the "NASR" button must be pressed.  However, if the Meridian
Diagram windows is already opened, switching between "Ellipses" and "Circles" will create a meridian
diagram based on the last reduction done.  To use new values, one of the seven sight reduction method
buttons must be pressed again.

Pressing the "Clear All" button clears all inputs and outputs.  Pressing the "Clear except DR" button
leaves the DR L and DR Lo as they were.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  These tools should reproduce the values in the corresponding parts of the USPS
SR96 form exactly, with the possible exception for NASR noted above, and for Pub. 249 and Pub. 229 noted
below.  In the Law of Cosines, all values of latitude, LHA, and declination are rounded to five decimal
places, to conform to the method used in the examples in the JN and N student manuals, and these values
are used in subsequent calculations.  The calculated value of Hc is rounded to five decimal places, and
this value is used in subsequent calculations.  However, depending on how the student does the
calculations, e.g. using unrounded values stored in memory, and even the model of the calculator used,
the value of the decimal representation of Hc may differ in the fifth, and possibly fourth, decimal
place, and the degrees and minutes representation may differ by 0.1', from the student's values.  A
difference of 0.1° in the value of Z is also possible.  In the methods that use an AP, the DR-LOP
distance is rounded to tenths of a nautical mile.  The  EP L and EP Lo should agree with a careful plot
within 0.1' for LoC and 0.3' for the other methods.  A two-body fix (for Law of Cosines only) should
agree fairly well with a plot, generally within 0.2' of latitude and longitude, but a three (or more)-
body fix may not agree that well with a plot because of the uncertainty in determining the fix position
of the plot.  When comparing a fix plot based on a methods that use an AP with the LoC calculated fix,
differences of up to about 1' of latitude and longitude can be expected.  The distance and bearing from
the DR to the fix are rounded to tenths of a nautical mile and whole degrees, respectively.

For all methods, the final value of Zn is rounded to whole degrees, the current USPS standard, which may
be contrary to some of the old SR forms, which rounded Zn to tenths of a degree.  For the form of the Law
of Cosine used, the azimuth of bodies near the zenith will not be accurate.

For Pub. 249, the values of Tab Hc and Tab d may differ from the tables by 1'.

For Pub. 229, all correction interpolations are done mathematically, and will occasionally be at a
variance with the interpolation table.  This variance should not exceed 0.1', and is most likely to occur
for the value of d2 corr.

H.O. 211 notes: 1) Both the compact and original versions have most of the tabular data rounded to the
nearest whole number.  However, the compact version show values below 166 to once decimal place, and the
original version shows values below 239 to one decimal place.  The example in the compact version shows
one of these low values rounded to a whole number, but an example in the original version uses the
tenths.  However, Celestial Tools will abide by the USPS rules for the compact version:  "Record all
decimal values exactly as shown in the Compact Table.  Do not round to the next whole number. Carry all
decimal values forward and use for all computations." 2) If "Compact" is selected, input latitude and
declination and the calculated value of K~L will be shown rounded to the nearest minute.  If "Original"
is selected, input latitude and declination and the calculated value of K~L will be shown rounded to the
nearest half minute.  These are the values actually used to enter the table, which are of more help to
the student than the real values.  If latitude and declination do not exactly correspond to a tabulated
value, improved accuracy can be obtained with interpolation, but this is generally not done, and is not
done by Celestial Tools. 3) From the "Compact Signt Reduction Table" booklet, first edition:  "Accuracy
decreases as K approaches 90° and an error of several miles may result. Consequently, it is good practice
to discard any sight in which K is between 82° and 98°.  Interpolation of the table will improve the
result somewhat if the salvation of the sight is imperative."  Celestial Tools does not interpolate in
these cases, but provides the option of using the Sadler Technique, described in the second edition, in
these cases. 4) When the body is near or on the prime vertical, the last A value (used to determine Z)
may be negative.  If so, it will be set to zero and Z will be 90°. 5) Due to the vagaries of rounding,
there will occasionally be a difference of one unit in the least significant figure of the calculated
tabular values compared to the actual tabular values.

For H.O. 214, there will occasionally be a difference of 1 unit (0.01) in the value of delta t compared
to the tabular values.  All corrections are not calculated mathematically, but are done by emulating the
multiplication tables at the end of the H.O. 214 book, and should match the tables well. The tables,
however, could be off by no more than 0.1' compared to a mathemical calculation.

For H.O. 208, there will occasionally be a difference of 1 unit in the values of A, B, C, and D, compared
to the tabular values, and other differences resulting as a consequence of these - no more than 0.2' in
intercept and no error in azimuth.

For both versions of the S-Table, the tabular values produced by Celestial Tools should be within 0.001
of the printed values.  When deriving an angle from a tabulated value, if there is a group of the same
tabulated value, Celestial Tools will try to use the average value.  Due to the vagaries of rounding,
this can result in an angle that differs from the printed values by 1'.  Also, the Farley version example
in the book shows a couple of angles to tenths of a minute.  Celestial Tools will round these values to
whole minutes.

For the Weems Line of Position Book, the A and B values calculated by Celestial Tools may disagree with
the tabular or interpolated B values by one least significant digit, i.e. if the tabular values are to
units, the disagreement might be 1; if the tabular values are to tenths, the disagreement might be 0.1.
(In the case of interpolated values, the program calculates the values using linear interpolation, the
way it would be done manually, which does not necessarily agree with values which would be determined by
direct calculation.)  Though examples in the third edition of the book show values of A always rounded to
units, Celestial Tools will show them to the resolution displayed in the table, and complete the
calculation using this resolution.  The angles calculated by Celestial Tools may disagree with the
tabular or interpolated values by 0.1'.  The values of Z and Zn calculated by formula may disagree with
examples in the book by 0.1° if the examples are shown to that resolution.

