TIDES

a. Purpose:  Determine the height of the tide at a desired time, using data extracted from a Tide Table,
as taught in the USPS Advanced Piloting (AP) 85/86 course or the AP 2004 (or later) course (see
Operation).  (This is not a tide prediction program.)  The Tide tool uses a form similar to the worksheet
of the AP 85/86 course.

Determine vertical clearance and depth under keel.

b. Operation:  For determining the tide at a reference station, required inputs are the desired time and
the times and heights of the high and low tides that bracket the desired time, obtained from Table 1 of
the Tide Table.  For determining the tide at a substation, additional required inputs are the Table 2
differences for times and heights of the high and low tides.  Times cannot be left blank, even if the
required time is 0000.  Heights are shown in feet, but can be entered in feet, meters, centimeters, or
any other linear unit, but the same unit must be used throughout, and the resultant heights will be in
that unit.  (It is recommended that centimeters be converted to meters.)  All other inputs are optional,
and can be used when a printed record of a complete tide determination is desired.

Note:  Tide tables use standard time.  The user must convert daylight savings times to standard times
before extracting data from the Tide Table.

When entering the Table 2 time differences, use the format of the tide table, i.e. the sign goes with the
hour, even if the hour is zero.  However, plus signs and leading zeros can be omitted.  Table 2 height
differences need not be preceded by a plus sign (+) if additive, but must be preceded by a minus sign (-)
if subtractive or an asterisk (*) if Table 2 expressed it as a ratio (indicated by an asterisk).  Omitted
zeros for height and time difference inputs are added automatically for the sake of a printed record.

The program will recognize when the times that bracket the desired time cross midnight.

Activating the "Calculate" button completes the calculation, using the selected option.

There are options to determine the height of tide correction by doing the calculation mathematically (the
default), where the actual values are used; or by using Table 3 values (as taught in AP 85/86), where the
actual entering arguments are rounded to tabular values; or to do the calculation using a simplified
"Rule of Twelfths" (as taught in AP 2004, a form of what is more commonly known as the "Rule of Tenths",
and is not the usual presentation of the Rule of Twelfths), where times are rounded to whole hours and
percentages are used for each time increment; or to do the calculation using an alternate form of  the
"Rule of Twelfths".  When using the simplified "Rules of Twelfths", if the half cycle duration is
significantly different from six hours, the results may not be satisfactory.  If this is true, the
alternate version of the "Rules of Twelfths", giving more accurate results, should be used.  A rule of
thumb is if the difference is 60 minutes or more the alternate form should be used, but the alternate
form can always be used, giving more accurate results, regardless of the difference.

When switching from one option to another there is no need to activate the "Calculate" button.

Choices that would be circled on a paper worksheet will appear in bold type.

Activating the "Clear" button clears all inputs and outputs.

Activating the "Calculate Vertical Clearances" button, which can be done with or without a previous depth
calculation, opens another window which is used to calculate the vertical clearance (defined in the AP
course as the clearance between the water and an overhead bridge) and the actual clearance (between the
highest point on the boat and the bridge), and the depth clearance (between the boat's keel and the
bottom).  Inputs are expected in feet or meters, with the same unit must be used throughout, and the
results will be in that unit.  Height of tide at desired time is required for either calculation. All
previously entered or calculated values are cleared, except if a height if tide calculation was already
made, it will automatically be used for this function, but can be changed if desired.

For Vertical Clearance, additional required inputs are the height of the object to be cleared (from the
chart), the mean tidal range (from Table 2), the mean tide level (from Table 2), and, if actual clearance
is desired, the height of the highest point on the boat.  For Depth Under Keel, additional required
inputs are the depth (from the chart) and the boat's draft.  (Charted heights and depths are given in
whole units and must be entered as such.)  Either calculation can be done by itself, or both cacluations
can be done simultaneously.  When Vertical Clearance is calculated, the intermediate step of the height
of MHW above MLLW is also shown.

Activating the "Clear" button clears all inputs and outputs.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  As with tide tables, the computation assumes that the rise and fall of the tides
conform to simple cosine curves.  This is often not true, so the heights obtained will be approximate.
The most accurate results are obtained using mathematical calculation for the height of tide correction.
Using the Table 3 option adds a bit of error to the theoretical (cosine) calculation; the alternate form
of the "Rule of Twelfths" generally imposes a  larger error, but these errors are usually no more than a
half a unit (more significant if the unit is meters, less significant if the unit is feet), and are
probably less relevant than if the rise and fall do not conform to a cosine curve.  The simplified form
of  the "Rule of Twelfths", however, can impose a significant and dangerous error if the half cycle
duration is significantly different from six hours

All height results are rounded to the nearest tenth of a unit.

