TVMDC

a. Purpose:  Update the values of the compass variables True (T), Variation (V), Magnetic (M), Deviation
(D), and Compass (C) when any one is changed. (T, M, and C can be courses, bearings, or headings,
consistent within the tool.)  Calculate the value of variation for a selected year based on the data
provided on a chart.

b. Operation: The window is divided into two sections.  The section on the left does the TVMDC
calculation.  The section on the right calculates variation based on chart data.

TVMDC (left section): As any value is entered or changed, all other appropriate values change on the fly.
Values of V and D do not change automatically; they only change by manually entering or changing their
values.  If T, M,  or C is changed,the other two are updated.  If V or D are changed, the values below or
above them are updated, depending on whether True to Compass (down arrow) or Compass to True (up arrow)
is selected.

Values must be entered in whole degrees.  Leading zeros are not needed.  To change a value, the existing
value must be deleted or backspaced over. Highlighting then typing the new value will not work.

Press the "Clear" button to clear all numerical values.

Variation (right section): Enter the charted variation (limited to 99°59'), year, and annual change.
Enter the year of interest (default is the system year).  As any of these values is entered or changed,
the value of Corrected Variation is updated automatically.  This value can then be used in the TVMDC
section if desired.

There are no limits imposed on the years except they are limited to a maximum of four digits.  Because of
this and the fact that Corrected Variation is calculated automatically, as a year is changed the
difference in years can be very large, possibly resulting in an unreasonably large value of Corrected
Variation.  Corrected Variations greater than 99° are flagged with a yellow background to warn of this
possibility.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  For TVMDC, outputs are displayed to three figures, with leading zeros added
where appropriate.  For Variation, Corrected Variation is  rounded to whole degrees.

