SIGHT AVERAGING

a. Purpose:  To analyze and obtain the average watch times and sextant altitudes for a run of sights.

b. Operation:  Input up to ten pairs of watch times (WT) and sextant altitudes (hs).  Sextant altitudes
can be entered in either degrees and decimal minutes (DM.m) or degrees, minutes, and seconds (DMS).
Watch times must be entered in chronological order.  Subsequent data entry lines do not become active
until an acceptable time is entered on the current line.  (This allows all the watch times to be entered
as a group, all the sextant altitude degrees to be entered as a group, etc.)

(Once data is entered on a line, it can be changed, but a line of data should never be completely
deleted.  This will result in error messages.  If, for instance, you wish to eliminate a sight from
averaging, use the Analyze function described below.)

At this point either the "Analyze" button or the "Calculate Averages" button can be activated.

If you are happy with the data as entered, activate the "Calculate Averages" button and the average watch
time and average sextant altitude will be displayed.

However, if you want to examine the data to look for bad sights or erroneous entries, activate the
"Analyze" button.  Unless the body is near the observer's meridian, a number of observations taken in
quick succession and plotted versus time should result in nearly a straight line.  When the "Analyze"
button is activated, the values of the "residuals" for each sight are then displayed.  The residuals are
the differences, in arc-minutes, between the measured altitude entered and the altitude calculated by a
least-squares linear regression fit determined from using all the entered times and altitudes.  (In
versions of Celestial Tools previous to V5.1.1, the differences (from sight to sight) of watch time and
sextant altitude are displayed, plus the rate of change of sextant altitude per unit time.  It was often
difficult to determine which sight was an outlier.)  If a sight seems bad, having a particularly high
residual (ignoring the sign), and you do not want to include it in the averaging, clear its check box. If
data was entered incorrectly, it can be fixed now.   (Whenever the "Analyze" button is pressed, all the
check boxes will be checked, even if previously cleared, and the displayed averages will disappear.  It
is presumed that a subsequent press of the "Analyze" button was done because of a change in the data,
perhaps from an erroneous value, so the old averages are no longer valid.)  Then press the "Calculate
Averages" button and the averages for the checked sights will be displayed.  If, for any reason, a sight
that is intended to be used for the average does not have a check box, simply press the "Analyze" button
again. (Note that this method of analysis results in a line through the data points that should resemble
a line drawn by eye on a plot, but can result in a good sight being rejected and a bad sight being
retained.  See the article "How to Average Celestial Sights for Optimum Accuracy", by David Burch, for an
improved method.)

Note that although the watch times have to be entered in chronological order, if you do not intend to
analyze the sights the sextant altitudes do not have to be entered on the same line as the corresponding
time.  However, it is recommended that the watch times and sextant altitudes be entered as pairs.  If you
intend to analyze the sights, it is mandatory that they be entered as pairs.  In any case, an error
message is generated if the number of watch times does not equal the number of sextant altitudes.

If a run of sights crosses midnight, which could occur when using an artificial horizon, the watch times
after midnight must be entered with an hour value of 24 instead of 00.  (Note that only this tool allows
times of up to 245959 to be entered.)  If necessary, subtract 24 hours from the resulting average watch
time and add one day.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  Average watch time is displayed to the nearest second.  Average sextant altitude
is displayed to the nearest tenth of a minute.  "Scatter" values are displayed to the nearest tenth of an
arc-minute.

