DISTANCE BY TWO BEARINGS/FIX BY CROSS BEARINGS/COURSE MADE GOOD BY THREE BEARINGS

a. Purpose:  Calculate the distance to a fixed object by taking two bearings on the object from a moving
vessel.  This works in the same manner as "doubling the angle on the bow", but works for any allowed
combination of bearings.  It will also calculate the distance from the position of the second bearing to
the point where the object is abeam (closest point of approach), and, if the required data is provided,
the time required to get to this point and the time of arrival at this point.  (This tool does the
calculations of Bowditch 2002 Table 18 - Distance of an Object by Two Bearings.)

It assumes that the vessel maintains its course and speed, and that the vessel is approaching the object,
not moving away from it.

Calculate a fix from two cross bearings on charted objects with no (or little) vessel movement between
the bearings, or a running fix if there is vessel movement between the bearings.  (Note:  To calculate a
fix by range and bearing, see Help>The Sailings>Other applications.)

Calculate the course made good (CMG) using three bearings on the same object at different times and the
time or distance intervals between them, as might be done if it is suspected that an unknown current has
thrown the vessel off track.

b. Tab #1: Distances by 2 Bearings:
Distance by two bearings: Select whether the bearings will be Relative (bow bearings, the
default), True, Magnetic, or Compass.  If True, Magnetic, or Compass is selected, enter the vessel's
course (whole degrees, from 0 to 359), as the type selected.  If Relative is selected, enter the first
and second bow (relative) bearings to the object, limited to whole degrees from 1 to 90.  (0° would be a
collision course; over 90° the vessel would already be moving away from the object.) These can be
clockwise or counterclockwiese, i.e. with respect to the starboard or port bow, with no sign.  If True,
Magnetic, or Compass is selected, enter the first and second bearings as the type selected (whole
degrees, 0 to 359).

Enter either the distance traveled between the two bearings (as actual distance or as start and end
knotmeter log values, Log1 and Log2, limited to 9999.9nm) or the speed and running time (as actual
running time or start and end times, Time1 and Time2, in hhmm format).  Log1 and Time1 are associated
with the first bearing; Log2 and Time2 are associated with the second bearing.  Distance can be entered
with tenth of a nautical mile resolution up to 99.9 nautical miles (a much larger than practical value).
Speed can be entered with tenth of a knot resolution up to 99.9 knots.  (The speed value is either a
constant speed or average speed based on the actual conditions.)  Run Time can be entered in integer
hours and integer minutes, or just integer minutes.  If an hour value is entered, minutes are limited to
59.  If no (or zero) hour value is entered, minutes are limited to 99 (1.65 hours).  If a minute value
greater than 59 is entered, the hour box is disabled.  If the entered speed and time result in a distance
greater than 99.9 nautical miles, an error message will be generated.  If Log1 is greater than Log2 an
error message will be generated.  If Time1 is later than Time2 an error message will be generated.  (The
program does not consider this to be a run that crosses midnight.  If this is actually the case, it is
best to use Run Time.)  Press the "Calculate Distance" button to get the distance from the position of
the second bearing to the object, the distance off that the object will be when abeam, and the distance
that would have to be traveled before the object is abeam.  If speed and run time were entered,
calculated distance from the position of the second bearing to the point where the object is abeam will
also be displayed.  If the times of the bearings rather than the run time are entered, the time that the
object will be abeam will also be displayed.  If Time1 and Time2 were entered, calculated run time will
also be displayed.

Pressing the "Clear" button clears the input and output data.

Switching from one bearing type to another clears the input and output data unless an illegal input value
remains, which must be corrected first.

Tab #2: Course by 2 or 3 Bearings
Course made good by three bearings and intervals between them: Enter the three bearings taken on the same
object and the intervals between the first and second bearing and the second and third bearing.  Bearings
must be in whole degrees, and can be true, magnetic, or compass, with the resulting CMG in the same
units.  Intervals can be time between bearings or the distance traveled between bearings.    Time or
distance can be used if speed is constant; distance must be used if speed has changed.  Intervals do not
have to be the actual values as long as the ratios are correct.  For instance, if the times or distances
between bearings are the same, the CMG will be correct as long as the same number is used in both
Interval boxes.  (Up to five characters, including a decimal point, are accepted.)  If, for instance, the
first interval is 1nm and the second is 2nm, one and two, two and four, etc., can be entered in the two
Interval boxes.  (In practice, the intervals are usually made the same to make the determination by
chartwork easier.)

Bearings must be monotonically increasing or decreasing.  If they do not appear as such, as would happen
if zero degrees was crossed (e.g. 345°, 355°, 5°), a message will appear asking for confirmation.

Pressing the "Calculate CMG" button completes the CMG calculation.

Pressing the "Clear" button clears the input and output data.

Tab #3: Fix from 2 Bearings
Fix by cross bearings: Enter the latitudes and longitudes of the two observed objects, obtained from a
chart.  Enter the true bearings from the vessel to the two objects, or check the "Reciprocal bearings"
box and enter the true reciprocal bearings from the two objects to the vessel.  Although bearings will
generally be in whole degrees, values up to 359.9° can be entered, with a maximum of five characters
including a decimal point.  Press the "Calculate Fix from Cross Bearings" button and the latitude and
longitude of the fix will be displayed.

To establish a running fix,  use The Sailings, Destination L and Lo to advance the position of the
earlier charted object to the later time, and use this position for L1 and Lo1.  (The earlier and later
charted objects could be the same.)

Bearings are best done with a hand bearing compass, but sighting over the vessel's compass can be done.
Magnetic or compass bearings must be converted to true bearings.  Ideally the smaller angle formed by the
cross bearings is 90°, giving the least fix error due to bearing error, but keeping the smaller angle
from 45° to 135° is recommended.  (Some sources, e.g. AP 85/86, recommend 40° to 140°; other sources,
e.g. AP 2004, recommend 30° to 150°.)  If the entered bearings are outside the 45° to 135° range a
message will be displayed.

Pressing the "Clear" button clears the input and output data, and unchecks the "Use reciprocal bearings"
checkbox if checked.

Accuracy/Resolution:  Distances are rounded to the nearest hundredth of a nautical mile.  Times are
rounded to the nearest minute.  Courses are rounded to the nearest degree.  Latitudes and longitudes are
rounded to the nearest tenth of a minute.

