FAVORITE PLACES

a. Purpose:  Save the latitudes, longitudes, range of useful azimuths, type of horizon (natural,
artificial, or dip short), and dip short distance for locations that will be reused for sight-taking
sessions.  Automatically load this data into the Sight Planner, Sight Reduction and Fix, Noon Sight, and
LoC/NASR tools, as appropriate.

b. Operation:  The Favorite Places window has two sections.  The upper section contains a list of
locations that have been saved.  The lower section is used for adding locations to the list.

The first time Favorite Places is activated, the list of locations will be empty.  In the lower section
of the window enter a descriptive name of a location (up to 35 characters), its latitude and longitude,
and a range of azimuths of interest.  The azimuth range is for use with Sight Planner.  As with Sight
Planner, if a range other than the default range of 0 to 360 degrees is desired, select a single range of
azimuths, going clockwise.  (That is, from 10 to 350 would give a 340 degree range, but from 350 to 10
would give a 20 degree range.)  Also select the type of horizon:  natural, artificial, or dip short
(represented as NH, AH, and DS, respectively, in the Hor column).  If dip short is selected, also enter
the numerical portion of the dip short distance (limited to five characters, including a decimal point)
and select the units of the dip short distance.  Then activate the "Add New Location" button and the
location will appear in the list in the upper section of the window.

More locations can be added to the list in the same manner.  As each one is added, it will appear in its
proper alphabetic position on the list.  (Actually the position is determined by the ANSI code for the
characters, so numbers will be before letters.)

To remove a location from the list, click on the location then activate the "Remove Location" button.
After confirmation the location will be removed.

To save the list for future use, activate the "Save Location List" button.  The list will be saved to a
file called "Favorite_Places.txt", which is located in the same directory as the Celestial Tools
executable.  (This file can be edited with a text editor such as Windows Notepad, but this is not
recommended because of font types and column spacings for the various entries.)  If you attempt to close
the Favorite Places window after a location has been added or removed from the list without saving the
list, you will be asked whether or not you want the list saved.

To use a location, either double-click on the desired location or click on the location and activate the
"Use Location" button.  (Use the scroll bar if necessary to get to the desired location.)  The latitude
and longitude will be loaded into Sight Planner, Sight Reduction and Fix, Noon Sight, and LoC/NASR; the
azimuth range will be loaded into Sight Planner; and the type of horizon, and, if applicable, the dip
short distance, will be loaded into Sight Reduction and Fix and Noon Sight.  This will happen whether or
not the tool windows are open.  The programs are then used normally.

The ability to save the type of horizon and the dip short distance was new in Celestial Tools V1.1.0.  In
order to maintain compatibility with 800x600 screens, the data columns had to be moved.  Unfortunately
this means that lists of Favorite Places developed with previous versions of Celestial Tools (V1.0.6 or
earlier, or betas of V1.1.0 dated before 9/30/2006) can be read by V1.1.1 or later but will not work
properly and will have to be re-entered. Possibly the best way to do this is to use your existing
Favorite Places, re-enter each location (including the new data), add it to the list, then remove the old
location.

Keep in mind that the dip short feature is of limited use.  Often you have to reduce the sight to get
azimuth, which you then use on your map to get the dip short distance.  However, if you are lucky enough
to use an area where there are one or more ranges of azimuths with a relatively constant dip short
distance, this feature should save some keystrokes.

