MANEUVERING BOARD (MoBoard)

a. Purpose:  Perform several of the calculations typically done on a maneuvering board.  Calculate the
Closest Point of Approach (CPA) of two vessels, course and speed of a contact (target) vessel, and
related information.  Vessel 1 is the reference vessel (you).  Vessel 2 is the contact vessel.  Ranges
and bearings are measured from Vessel 1 to Vessel 2.  If the resulting CPA is zero, a collision will
occur.  (It is up to the captain to determine what range is "close enough".  Two types of calculations
are included, depending on what data is known.  On a recreational vessel, data is typically obtained from
a radar without Automatic Radar Plotting Aid (ARPA).

Calculate the speed and direction of the true wind if the speed and course of the vessel and the speed
and relative direction of the apparent wind are known.  Calculate the speed and relative direction of the
apparent wind if the speed and course of the vessel and the speed and  direction of the true wind are
known.

b. Operation:  In the first (default) CPA type of calculation, required inputs are the range and bearing
from Vessel 1 to Vessel 2 at two times, and, optionally, the course and speed of Vessel 1 (only needed to
calculate Vessel 2 course and speed, not needed for CPA).  (In practice, a minimum of three sets of
measurements are taken, in order verify that Vessel 2 is maintaining its course and speed.  Once
verified, any two of the sets of measurements, preferably the earliest and latest, can be used for the
calculation.)  Times are in whole minutes, ranges to hundredths of a nautical mile (limited to 99.99),
bearings to tenths of a degree (limited to 359.9), course to tenths of a degree (limited to 359.9), and
speed to tenths of a knot (limited to (99.9).  Press the "Calculate" button.  Outputs are the range of
the CPA; the time to the CPA (measured from the later time); the bearing from Vessel 1 to Vessel 2 at the
CPA; the time of CPA;  the direction of relative movement (DRM, also called direction of relative motion)
and the speed of relative movement (SRM, also called speed of relative motion) of Vessel 2 with respect
to Vessel 1; and the course and speed of Vessel 2.  (SRM and DRM are the speed and course of Vessel 2
with respect to Vessel 1, and can be thought of as the speed and course of Vessel 2 if Vessel 1 were
stationary.)  Vessel 2 can be a fixed object.  If no values are entered for  Vessel 1 speed, Vessel 1 is
considered stationary.  If the time to the CPA is negative, CPA occurred before the later time, and the
vessels are already moving apart.

If the second time appears to be earlier than the first time, verification that the second time is on the
following day, i.e. after midnight, will be requested, to confirm that it is not just an input error.

In the second type of CPA calculation, required inputs the speeds and courses of Vessel 1 and Vessel 2,
and the bearing and range from Vessel 1 to Vessel 2 at any available time.  (Actual time is not
required.)  Speeds are to tenths of a knot (limited to 99.9), courses and bearings are to tenths of a
degree, and ranges are to hundredths of a nautical mile (limited to 99.99).   Press the "Calculate"
button.  Outputs are the range of the CPA; the time to the CPA (from the time of the data); the bearing
from Vessel 1 to Vessel 2 at the CPA; and the DRM  and SRM.

For the CPA calculations. course and bearing inputs can be true (recommended) or magnetic or compass
(with respect to Vessel 1's compass), but must be consistent throughout, with resulting outputs of the
same type.

For the True Wind calculation, required inputs are the true course and speed of the vessel and the speed
and relative "from" direction of the apparent wind.  Courses and directions are to tenths of a degree
(limited to 359.9).  Speeds are to tenths of a knot (limited to 99.9).  The relative direction of the
apparent wind can be entered as a negative number.  For instance, if the apparent wind is coming from 50°
off the port bow, this can be entered as 310° (360 - 50) or -50° (relative).  The calculated direction of
the true wind is displayed in degrees true.  However, if the Vessel Course is omitted or set to zero, the
calculated direction of the true wind is effectively in degrees relative.

For the Apparent Wind calculation, required inputs are the true course and speed of the vessel and the
speed and true (referred to true north) "from" direction of the true wind.  Courses and directions are to
tenths of a degree (limited to 359.9).  Speeds are to tenths of a knot (limited to 99.9).    The
calculated direction of the apparent wind is displayed in degrees relative (to the course of the vessel).
However, if the Vessel Course is omitted or set to zero, the calculated direction of the apparent wind is
effectively in degrees true.

Pressing the "Clear" button clears the input data of the displayed type of calculation, unless an illegal
value remains, which must be corrected first. Inputs of the types that are not displayed are not cleared.

Switching from one type to the other clears the output data but does not clear the input data.

Calculations assume that both vessels have maintained course and speed.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  As with a maneuvering board, these are two-dimensional approximate solutions to
a three-dimensional problem, but should be reasonably accurate for values for which a maneuvering board
would be used.

Ranges are displayed to hundredths of a nautical mile, elapsed times to tenths of minutes, clock times to
whole minutes, speeds to tenths of a knot, and courses and bearings to tenths of a degree.

