NAVIGATION MATHEMATICS

a. Purpose:  Single or double linear interpolation, generally used with a table of values.  Single
interpolation is used if either a row or a column table entering value is the desired value.  Double
interpolation is used if neither a row nor a column table entering value is the desired value.

Convert angles in degrees and minutes and time in hours, minutes, and seconds to decimal degrees and
decimal hours.  This is particularly useful for determining values for use in the Interpolation tool.

Add or subtract two angles in degrees and minutes format.

Add or subtract mixed values of time.  Convert a mixed time to days/hours/minutes/seconds.

Solve time of day problems, like time to call, time of arrival, time of departure, etc.

Calculate Zone Description from longitude.

b. Operation: Interpolation: R1, R3, C1, and C3 are tabulated row and column table entering values.  R2
and C2 are the desired (untabulated) row and column table entering values.  K1, K2, K3, and K4 are values
extracted from the table (K for "known").  (Negative K values are permitted; negative R and C values are
not permitted.  Negative K values allow interpolation where the K values might have different signs, as
in the case of a deviation table.)  Shaded, unlabeled boxes are calculated output values.

For double interpolation, enter values in the C1, C2, C3, R1, R2, R3, K1, K2, K3, and K4 boxes.  Press
the "Interpolate" button.  Output values will appear in the darker boxes.

For single interpolation, enter values in the C1, C2, C3, K1, and K3 boxes, or in the R1, R2, R3, K1, and
K2 boxes.  Unused K boxes must be left blank for Celestial Tools to recognize it as a single
interpolation calculation.  Press the "Interpolate" button.  Output values will appear in the darker
boxes.

Input values must not be entered as mixed units.  For example, longitudes must be in decimal degrees or
decimal minutes, not in degrees and minutes; times must be in decimal hours or minutes or seconds, not in
hours, minutes, and seconds.  If convenient, a constant can be subtracted from each value.  For example,
1h 00m, 1h 03m, and 1h 10m can be most conveniently entered as 60, 63, and 70, or as 0, 3, and 10.  (Be
sure to write the full values on your worksheet and to extract data from the correct rows and columns of
the table.)  A sexagesimal-to-decimal converter for angles and times is included for the convenience of
the user.  Angles can be entered in either degrees and decimal minutes (DM.m) or degrees, minutes, and
seconds (DMS).  Converted time is expressed both as  decimal hours and as whole hours and decimal
minutes.

The program will check if the entered values make sense (C2 must be between C1 and C3, R2 must be between
R1 and R3, etc.).  If not, a message is generated.

Trailing zeros to the right of a decimal point need not be entered and will not be displayed.  For
example, 26.0 may be entered as 26 and will be displayed as 26. (Be sure to use the required precision on
your worksheet.)

The "Clear" buttons clear all input and output values.

Sexagesimal-to-Decimal Converter: Select the angle format to be used (degrees and decimal minutes or
degrees, minutes, and seconds.  Enter the angle to convert (range 0° to 999°59.9') and/or time to convert
(range 0 to 99h59m59s).  Press the "Convert" button to complete the conversion.

The "Clear" buttons clear all input and output values.

Angle Addition and Subtraction: Enter the two angles and select the operation to be performed (+ or -).
The result is updated whenever anything is changed.

The "Clear" buttons clear all input and output values.

Time Addition/Subtraction/Conversion: For addition or subtraction. enter any combination of days (d),
hours (h), minutes (m), and seconds (s) for the two values to be combined, and select the operation to be
performed (+ or -).  Acceptable input characters are the digits 0 through 9 and one decimal point.  There
is essentially no limit on the number of characters that can be entered, but keep in mind that all
characters might not be able to be seen at once.  Input values can be mixed.   For example, 126.5 hours
can be entered as 126.5h, 5d 6h 30m, 5d 6.5h, etc.    Press the "Calculate" button.  The calculated time
will be displayed as days, hours, minutes, and seconds.  Negative results will have a minus sign before
the days value.  Whenever any input value or operation is changed, the calculated value will be cleared.

To convert a mixed time to days, hours, minutes, and seconds, simply enter the mixed time as the upper
time, leave the lower time blank, and press the "Calculate" button.

The "Clear" buttons clear all input and output values.

Time of Day Calculator: Enter the zone time (ZT, based on the civil time zone) at Location A in the
format hhmm, from 0000 to 2359.  Enter the zone description (ZD) of Location A.  If Daylight Savings Time
is in effect at Location A and it has not been included in the zone description, check the DST box.
Enter the Interval (travel time), if any, as any combination of days (d), minutes (m), and hours (h).
Acceptable input characters are the digits 0 through 9 and one decimal point. There is essentially no
limit on the number of characters that can be entered, but keep in mind that all characters might not be
able to be seen at once. Any convenient values can be used.  For example, 126.5 hours can be entered as
126.5h, 5d 6h 30m, 5d 6.5h, etc.   If there is an Interval, and the time at Location B is expected to be
later than the time at Location A, as when calculating an arrival time, select the + operator.  If the
time at Location B is expected to be earlier than the time at Location A, as when calculating a departure
time, select the - operator.  Enter the zone description (ZD) of Location B.  If Daylight Savings Time is
in effect at Location B and it has not been included in the zone description, check the DST box.  Press
the "Calculate" button.  The calculated ZT (civil) will be displayed as a time of day (0000 to 2359) with
the number of whole days, before (-) or after (+), if any, also displayed.  Whenever any input value or
operation is changed, the calculated value will be cleared.

The "Clear" buttons clear all input and output values.

Time Zone Calculator: Enter the longitude.  The Zone Description (ZD) updates automatically as values are
changed.

The "Clear" buttons clear all input and output values.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  Both older and newer courses state that only final answers should be rounded;
any values along the way should not be rounded.  However, older courses have a special rule for
interpolation.  For example, N93 states "For intermediate interpolation numbers, work to one decimal
place greater than the tabular precision.  The final interpolated number is then rounded to the same
precision as the table."  A consequence of this rule is that a slightly different final result could be
obtained depending on whether the first interpolation is done horizontally or vertically. The
Interpolation tool does not use this special rule.  All outputs are rounded to a maximum of five decimal
places, and rounded intermediate values are used for subsequent calculations.  As such, the order of
interpolation has no effect, and all four intermediate values, in addition to the final value, will be
displayed.  It is left to the user to round appropriately.

In the sexagesimal-to-decimal converter , converted values are rounded to a maximum of five decimal
places.

The Angle Addition and Subtraction tool should give accurate results, constrained to 0° to 359°59.9'.

In the Time Addition and Subtraction tool, results are rounded to whole seconds.

In the Time of Day Calculator tool, results are constrained to 0000 to 2359, rounded to whole minutes.

The Time Zone Calculator should give accurate Zone Descriptions based on longitude alone.

