THE SAILINGS

a. Purpose:  For Mid-Latitude Sailing, Mercator Sailing, and "Accurate Rhumb Line" Sailing:  Calculate
course and distance given initial position and final position.  Calculate final position given initial
position, course, and distance.  Calculate set and drift given DR position, fix position, and elapsed
time from previous fix; if previous fix is known, calculate drift angle, distance between fixes, course
made good (more properly called track made good), speed made good.  For Great Circle Sailing:  Calculate
initial course and distance, maximum latitude (vertex), and final course, given initial position and
final position.  Calculate final position, maximum latitude, and final course, given initial position,
initial course, and distance.  Calculate the points on a great circle route, rhumb line course and
distance from point to point, and total rhumb line distance.  For all Sailings:  Calculate position given
range and bearing to known object.

This tool includes three types of rhumb line sailings, Mid-Latitude, Mercator, and "Accurate Rhumb Line",
and Great Circle sailing.

Mid-Latitude Sailing is a form of plane sailing, where the surface of the Earth is considered flat and
the curvature of the Earth is not taken into account. It is an approximation that is considered
sufficiently accurate for shorter distances.  This value varies from source to source, with some sources
suggesting no more than 600 nm, and others, e.g. Bowditch, having examples over 1000 nm.  Earlier
versions of Celestial Tools limited this distance to 600 nm, but this limitation was increased to 9999.9
nm with V2.2.0, allowing a comparison of this method to the other methods provided for longer distances.
(This limitation only applies to input values; calculated distances can exceed this.)  However, mid-
latitude sailing has its issues near the poles, so the maximum latitude is limited  to 84°59.9', and a
message will be generated if any part of the course exceeds this.  (Note that this will also generate the
message for a course of 0° or 180° which exceeds this latitude, for which mid-latitude sailing is
accurate, but for which there is no need to use a sailing of any kind.

Mercator sailing considers the curvature of the earth, and is considered the most accurate form of rhumb
line sailing developed for tabular use, but is less popular than mid-latitude sailing because its manual
calculation is more difficult and requires an additional table (meridional parts).  USPS considers it the
preferred tabular rhumb line method for distances over 600 nm.  As with mid-latitude, input distance is
limited to 9999.9 nm, but calculated distances can exceed this.  When using tables, Mercator sailing is
unreliable when the course lies within 5° of due east or west.  This is not a problem when using a
calculator or computer except when calculating final position when the course is directly east or west,
where conventional mid-latitude sailing is used.

"Accurate Rhumb Line" sailing is the method used in Visual Passage Planner 2, and was never a tabular
method.  It is the most accurate form of rhumb line sailing, and can be used for short or long distances.

For Mercator sailing and Accurate Rhumb Line sailing, for courses of 0° or 180° where the course crosses
a pole, the calculation will not be completed, but a message will be generated.

Although most similar to Mid-Latitude Sailing, the Destination L and Lo function of any of the rhumb line
sailings can be used in place of the "Simplified Traverse Table", with more accurate results.  However,
starting with V5.0.0, the Simplified Traverse Table computation of arrival position knowing departure
point and distance traveled has been included.

Any of the rhumb line sailings can be used to calculate the drift angle between two fixes by calculating
the course from the earlier fix to the later fix and the course between the earlier fix and the DR
position at the time of the later fix, and taking the difference between them.  Alternatively, the drift
angle can be found in one step by using the set and drift tool.

Great circle sailing provides the shortest distance between two points, but since it is more difficult to
follow a great circle route than a rhumb line, it is most practical when traveling long distances at high
latitudes.  A frequently used rule of thumb is that for latitudes less than 40° and distances less than
1000 nautical miles, the distance saving in a great circle route is usually not significant.

A great circle route can reach latitudes higher than that of the point of departure or destination.  To
avoid high latitudes where ice or gales might be encountered, a modification of great circle sailing
called "composite sailing" may be used.  There are two methods used to accomplish this.  In Method 1, a
great circle route is plotted from the point of departure to the destination and is followed from the
point of departure until it crosses the limiting latitude, then the parallel of the limiting latitude is
followed until the great circle again crosses it, then the great circle route is followed to the
destination.  In Method 2, one great circle is plotted from the point of departure tangent to the
limiting parallel, and a second from the destination tangent to the limiting parallel.  The first is
followed from the point of departure to the limiting latitude, then the parallel of the limiting latitude
is followed until the second great circle reaches it, then the second great circle is sailed to the
destination.  Method 1 is easier to plot, but Method 2 results in a shorter course.  (In both methods,
plotting is done on a gnomonic projection.)

b. Operation:

For all cases, press "Calculate" to complete the calculation.  (See below regarding the "Simplified
Traverse Table" method.)

Mid-Latitude, Mercator, and "Accurate Rhumb Line" Sailing:  Select whether you want to calculate course
and distance, final position (destination L and Lo), or set and drift.  L1 and Lo1 are the latitude and
longitude of the initial (point of departure) position.  L2 and Lo2 are the latitude and longitude of the
final (destination) position.  L1 and L2 are limited to 84°59.9' for Mid-Latitude,and  89°59.9' for
Mercator and "Accurate Rhumb Line".

When calculating final position, enter L1, Lo1, true course (with 0.1° resolution), and either the
distance (as actual distance or as start and end knotmeter log values, Log1 and Log2, limited to
9999.9nm) or the speed and running time (as actual running time or start and end times, Time1 and Time2,
in hhmm format).  Distance can be entered with tenth of a nautical mile resolution up to 9999.9 nautical
miles. Speed can be entered with tenth of a knot resolution up to 99.9 knots.  (The speed value is either
a constant speed or average speed based on the actual conditions.)  Run Time can be entered in integer
hours and integer minutes, or just integer minutes.  If an hour value is entered, minutes are limited to
59.  If no (or zero) hour value is entered, minutes are limited to 999 (almost 17 hours).  If a minute
value greater than 59 is entered, the hour box is disabled.  If Log1 is greater than Log2 an error
message will be generated.  If Time1 is later than Time2 an error message will be generated.  (The
program does not consider this to be a run that crosses midnight.  If this is actually the case, it is
best to use Run Time.)  Press the "Calculate" button to get the latitude and longitude of the final
position.  If speed and time were entered, calculated distance will also be displayed.  If Time1 and
Time2 were entered, calculated run time will also be displayed.

If Mid-Latitude and Destination L and Lo are both selected, there is the option of calculation the
arrival (destination) position using the "Simplified Traverse Table" method taught in recent N courses,
rather than the more accurate mid-latitude calculation.  If this is chosen, outputs consist of the eight
lines of intermediate values, the Arrival Position answer, and any other calculation that is normally
displayed if distance is not input directly.  Only the final result of the intermediate values is shown -
how they are derived is not, as that can be seen on the worksheet.  "Use this mid-latitude for CLS SAPS
plot", described below, is ignored even if checked.  As with Mid-Latitude sailing, L1 is limited to
84°59.9'.

When calculating course and distance, enter L1, Lo1, L2, and Lo2, then press the "Calculate" button.

When calculating set, drift, and drift angle, enter the Fix L and Fix Lo and the DR L and DR Lo at the
time of the fix.  For drift determination, enter the elapsed time from the previous fix in integer hours
and integer minutes, or just integer minutes, or the times of the earlier and later fixes, Time1 and
Time2, in hhmm format.  (The same rules as when calculating final position apply.)  (Time is not required
for set or drift angle determination.)  If the latitude and longitude of the prior fix are available,
check the "Prior fix available for drift angle, CMG, SMG calculation" and enter the values (latitude
limited to 89°59.9').  Press "Calculate" to get the set, total drift (the distance between the DR and the
fix), drift, and, if the prior fix location was entered, the drift angle and whether it is to port or to
starboard, the distance beween fixes, the course made good (CMG), and the speed made good (SMG).  If
Time1 and Time2 were entered, calculated run time will also be displayed.

(Set and drift can also be determined between two fixes by first determining the Destination L and Lo
from the first fix knowing course and speed.  Then use this position as the DR L and DR Lo, along with
the L and Lo of the second fix, in the Set and Drift calculation.  Including the first fix as the "prior
fix" will also provide drift angle.  The need to do this, however, was eliminated in V5.4.0, as these
values have been included in the calculation.)

If Mercator Sailing is being used, the meridional parts for the starting latitude (M1), the destination
latitude (M2), and the meridional difference (m) will also be displayed, unless calculating final
position with a course directly east or west, where conventional mid-latitude sailing is used.  Two
options are available:  "WGS 1972 ellipsoid" or "Clarke 1866 spheroid".  With "WGS 1972 ellipsoid"
selected, the values of the meridional parts should agree with the Meridional Parts tables of editions of
Bowditch (American Pratical Navigator) starting in the late 1900s.  If "Clarke 1866 spheroid" is
selected, the values of the meridional parts should agree with the Meridional Parts tables of editions of
Bowditch of the mid-1900s.  The values in the Meridional Parts tables of editions of Bowditch can be
produced by just entering a latitude and pressing "Calculate".

When calculating final position or set and drift, as any value is entered, values that are no longer
appropriate are disabled.  For example, when calculating final position, if Time1 is entered, Run Time,
Log1, Log2, and Distance will be disabled.

Normally mid-latitude sailing uses the algebraic average of the initial latitude and the final latitude
(whether an input or calculated) (south latitude is negative).  However, when using a Constant Latitude
Scale (CLS) Small Area Plotting Sheet (SAPS), it is often desirable to use a convenient value of mid-
latitude in order to keep the plot near the center of the sheet.  If a specific mid-latitude is to be
used, check the "Use this mid-latitude for CLS SAPS plot" checkbox and enter the desired value in degrees
and tens of minutes (0, 10, 20, 30, 40, or 50), with a maximum value of  55°00', the largest value shown
on the CLS SAPS. This will result in an output that more closely matches the plot, but causes a slight
error in longitude, zero at the equator and increasing to about 0.8' at a latitude of 55°.  Since a CLS
SAPS has latitude and longitude ranges of one degree, an error message will appear if either is exceeded.
If the selected mid-latitude causes the latitude range of the CLS SAPS to exceed one degree an error
message will appear.  (The Universal Plotting Sheet is also a CLS chart, bit its small scale does not
warrant the use of this feature.)

When switching from one sailing to another, outputs are cleared but inputs are retained for ease in
making comparisons.  When switching from one function to another, all inputs and outputs are cleared.
Pressing "Clear All" removes all the input and output data.  Pressing "Clear But Use L2, Lo2 For New L1,
Lo1" removes all the input and output data but makes the entered or calculated final position into a new
initial position, and, if a specific mid-latitude was entered and the box checked, the entered value will
be retained and the box will remain checked.

Keep in mind that, because of rounding, the Destination L and Lo and the Course and Distance calculations
might give slghtly inconsistent results.  For instance, if you enter the latitudes and longitudes of a
departure point and a destination point and calculate the course and distance, and then use the
calculated values in a Destination L and Lo calculation with the same departure point, you will probably
not end up with exactly the same destination point.

Great Circle Sailing: Select whether you want to calculate initial course and distance or final position
(destination L and Lo).  L1 and Lo1 are the latitude and longitude of the initial (point of departure)
position.  L2 and Lo2 are the latitude and longitude of the final (destination) position.

When calculating initial course and distance, enter L1, Lo1, L2, and Lo2.  Press the "Calculate" button
and the initial course, distance, maximum latitude, and final course will be displayed.  If the initial
and final points are antipodes (i.e. on diametrically opposite sides of the earth) but not the poles, a
message will be displayed.  (If  L1 and/or L2 are poles, the values of Lo1 and Lo2 do not matter.)

When calculating final position, enter L1, Lo1, true course (with 0.1° resolution), and  distance.
Distance can be entered with tenth of a nautical mile resolution up to 9999.9 nautical miles.  Press the
"Calculate" button to get the latitude and longitude of the final position, maximum latitude, and final
course.

Note that the initial course for the reversed course (L2, Lo2 to L1, Lo1) equals the final course of the
original course +/-180°.

After the "Calculate" button is pressed, and if the entered or calculated course is not 0° or 180°,
another button, "Points on Great Circle Route", becomes enabled.  When it is pressed, another window,
"Points on Great Circle Route",  opens, listing the latitudes for the initial and final longitudes for
the great circle course, the latitudes for each whole 5° longitude between them, the rhumb line course
and distance from point to point, and the total rhumb line distance.  (The program uses "Accurate Rhumb
Line" sailing to calculate the courses and distances, but any rhumb line tool  can now be used to
calculate a rhumb line course between individual points.  The "Points on Great Circle Route" window also
allows the calculation of the latitude for any longitude on that great circle, not just longitudes on the
route.  Enter the longitude of the point, press the "Point Latitude" button, and the corresponding
latitude will be displayed.

Once any data, input or output, is displayed on the "Points on Great Circle Route" window, it is cleared
whenever the "Calculate" button is pressed again.

Composite Sailing: When Great Circle, Initial Course and Distance is selected, and it is desired to use
composite sailing, check the "Use Composite Sailing" check box.  Enter the latitude limit (range 1° to
89°59.9'); in practice, typically 38° to 50°).  Select Method 1 or Method 2.  Activate the "Calculate"
button to complete the calculation.  Outputs include initial course, longitudes of the limiting parallel
crossings, the distance of each segment, the total distance, and the final course.

Pressing the "Points on Composite Route" button performs a function similar to the "Points on Great
Circle Route" button for the particular composite sailing method selected., except the portion along the
limiting parallel is shown as one segment rather than being broken at whole 5° longitude increments.   If
Method 1 is selected, the "Points on Composite Route" window also allows the calculation of the latitude
for any longitude on the great circle portion of the route (including the portion beyond the limiting
parallel), not just longitudes on the route.  Enter the longitude of the point, press the "Point
Latitude" button, and the corresponding latitude will be displayed.  (Because there are two great circles
onvolved in Method 2, this feature is only enabled for Method 1.)

Pressing "Clear All" removes all the input and output data.  Pressing "Clear But Use L2, Lo2 For New L1,
Lo1" removes all the input and outpur data but makes the entered or calculated final position into a new
initial position.  This allows the final postiion of a vessel that has traveled a series of rhumb lines
to be determined mathematically, a convenient, step-by-step version of the Bowditch 2002 Table 4 Traverse
Table method.

Other applications: The LoC/NASR tool will calculate an EP for a Law of Cosines reduction and an AP/EP
(as defined in the LoC/NASR Help) for a NASR reduction, but this can also be done with the Mid-Latitude
and Mercator sailings, using the "Calculate Destination L and Lo" function.  Enter the DR L and Lo (LoC)
or AP L and Lo (NASR) as L1 and L2, intercept length as Distance, and azimuth (be sure to add or subtract
180º if intercept was Away) as True Course.  The resulting L2 and Lo2 correspond to the EP (LoC) or AP/EP
(NASR).

Any of the Sailings can be used to calculate position given the range and bearing to an object with a
known latitude and longitude.  Use the "Calculate Destination L and Lo" function, with the latitude and
longitude of the object as L1 and Lo1, and the reciprocal true bearing for True Course.  After the
distance is entered, press the Calculate button to get your latitude and longitude.  Since visual
bearings are generally at distances no more than 10 nm, any of the Sailings should give the same
position.

Taking this a step further, consider the situation of a multi-body fix using the NASR method from a
moving vessel, where an earlier LOP must be advanced to the last LOP.  Enter the AP L and Lo (as L1 and
Lo1), speed, and elapsed time from the earlier sight to the last sight.  The resulting L2 and Lo2
effectively advance the AP to the time of the last sight.  Use the "Clear But Use L2, Lo2 for New L1,
Lo1" button.  Then enter intercept length as Distance and azimuth (be sure to add or subtract 180º if
intercept was Away) as True Course.  The resulting L2 and Lo2 correspond to the advanced AP/EP.

The Sailings can also be used to find the set and drift of current using two fixes and the course, speed,
and run time between them  (or the time of each fix).  Use the "Calculate Destination L and Lo" function
with the first fix, course, speed, and elapsed time.   (Be sure to record the Destination L and Lo, as
they are not saved when switching functions.)  Enter the calculated position as the DR position in the
"Calculate Set and Drift" function, the second fix as the Fix position, and the run time between them (or
the time of each fix).

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  Calculated courses are displayed to both the nearest hundredth of a degree and
rounded to whole degrees (just to whole degrees for the rhumb line courses in "Points on Great Circle
Route").  Calculated distances and total drift are displayed to the nearest tenth of a nautical mile.
Calculated set and drift angle are displayed to the nearest degree.  Calculated drift is displayed to the
nearest tenth of a knot. Calculated latitudes and longitudes are displayed to the nearest tenth of a
minute.

Rhumb line distances in "Points on Great Circle Route" may differ by 0.1 nm from that shown using
"Accurate Rhumb Line" on an individual pair of points because "Points on Great Circle Route" uses the
unrounded calculated values of latitude.

For Mercator sailing, values of meridional parts for latitudes with whole minutes (the latitudes
tabulated in the Meridional Parts tables) are expected to agree with the Meridional Parts tables of
editions of Bowditch (American Practial Navigator) from at least 1981 through 2002 when "WGS 1972
ellipsoid" is selected.  These tables are based on the World Geodetic Survey of 1972 ellipsoid.  (This is
the table that was used in the USPS JN course in the 1990s.)  When "Clarke 1866 spheroid" is selected,
values of meridional parts are expected to agree with the Meridional Parts tables of editions of the
mid-20th century, which are based on the Clarke spheroid of 1866, the standard reference spheroid used
for charting North America at the time. (Editions of the early 20th century and earlier used yet another
basis.)  When a latitude of interest contains tenths of minutes, manual calculation is done by linear
interpolation between the whole minute latitudes immediately above and below the latitude of interest.
Celestial Tools calculates the meridional parts for latitudes with tenths of minutes using the same
formulas that are used to calculate the values for latitudes with whole minutes.  This is more accurate
than interpolation, but could result in a differences compared to interpolated values.  The differene
between calculated and interpolated values increases with increasing latitude, being nor more than 0.1 at
low to middle latitudes, no more than 0.2 up to about 89°, and as much as 0.7% (over 200) near 90°

For composite sailing Method 1, because of the rounding of the rhumb line distances, it is possible that
the total rhumb line distance could be slightly less than the total composite sailing distance.

Remember that for all sailings, calculations are done to the full precision of the computer, followed by
rounding.  In most cases this results in an answer that is different, and probably more accurate, than a
calculation done by hand with tables.  As with tables, the computations assume the Earth is a sphere, not
an oblate spheroid.  For this reason, results may be slightly different than those of sources that
consider the oblateness.

