SIGHT PLANNER

a. Purpose:  For the date/time and latitude & longitude input, this form will display th following:
1. The sunrise and sunset times for all 4 astronomical times and the moonrise / moonset info
2. List of Visible Bodies: Three lists of visible astronomical bodies by their 1st, 2nd, and 3rd magnitude.
3. Sky View of Visible Bodies: A configurable sky view of the visible astronomical bodies
4. Star Finder Data: Input data to configure and use the traditional Star Finder 
5. Rising / Setting Times: A 24 hour circular view of the sun and moon rising and setting times 
at the top of the form

Note: Uset can create a list of bodies for a planned sight outing by clicking on the body name on 
the "List of Visible Bodies" page or the "View of Visible Bodies" page. The sight plan list created
can be printed off or saved as a text file that can be found in the /FavoriteLocs folder where Celestial
Tools runs on Windows. When you close the sight plan list form, the plan list is closed and gone (unless
saved as a text file or printed).

Sun and Moon Rising and Setting Times: The Sight Planner will calculate the times of the Sun's rising
and setting phenomena (twilights) and azimuths of sunrise and sunset for the entered date and location,
and find the azimuth, altitude, and magnitude of the navigational bodies which are above the horizon at a
selected time, without the need to consult an almanac or tables or to use a Rude (2102-D) Star Finder.
(Since the program is intended to emulate the Rude Star Finder, it does not include corrections for
refraction and dip.)  It will also calculate the availability data for a Sun-Moon fix for the entered
date, location, azimuth range, and minimum altitude.  In addition, it will calculate the times
(accurately or using the approximate method currently taught in the Celestial Navigation class) and 
azimuths of moonrise and moonset and the phase of the Moon for the entered date and location.

b. Operation:  Initial required inputs are date & time, location latitude and longitude, and time zone. 
Zone Description is automatically calculated based on longitude, when 'auto' option is chose. The GMT / UT
option forces time outputs to be in Universal Time.  Check the DST box if the timepiece is set for
Daylight Savings Time. The program displays the zone times
of sunrise, sunset, and civil, nautical, and astronomical morning and evening twilights in 24-hour
format; the azimuths of sunrise and sunset (in parentheses, next to the times, if "Upper Limb" is
selected); the times and azimuths of moonrise and moonset (if "Upper Limb" is selected), if they occur;
and  the approximate phase of the Moon at ZT 1200, expressed in percent illumination, and whether it is
waxing or waning.  (Note that rises and sets are defined as when the upper limb of the body is on the
visible horizon.)  Any of the entered values can be changed at any time and the calculations redone.

A time of "----" indicates that the Sun phenomenon does not occur for the date and location entered (e.g.
midsummer sun does not set in high latitudes).

(Note that when a manual time zone or DST is used, it is possible for solar phenomena to occur on the
previous or next day.  For example, if the Start of AM Astronomical Twilight is 2336 and the Start of AM
Nautical Twilight is 0058, the 2336 time is the previous day.)

Note that in higher latitudes (generally above 62°) the Moon can remain above or below the horizon all
day.  A less well known quirk of the arctic is that on certain days the Moon can rise or set twice.  (Try
23 June 1989, L 66°N, Lo 0°.)

Enter the zone time of interest for body visibility (i.e. above the horizon).  Any time can be entered
(hhmm format), but in most cases it will be the start of AM civil twilight or the end of PM civil
twilight, considered to be the middles of the optimum observing periods.  When the time is entered, a box
next to it will indicate whether the time entered occurs during daylight (yellow background), during
twilight (blue background), or at night (black background). (For the purposes of this function, morning
twilight is defined as the time of the start of AM nautical twilight through the minute before the time
of sunrise;  evening twilight is defined as the time of sunset through the minute before the time of the
end of PM nautical twilight.)  This is intended to help catch errors in entering the desired zone time -
in most cases the box should be blue, indicating twilight.  If it is not, be sure the entered time is the
desired time.  If a range of azimuths of interest for body visibility other than 0° to 360° (the default)
is desired, select a single range of azimuths, going clockwise.  (That is, from 10 to 350 would give a
340° range, but from 350 to 10 would give a 20° range.  Remember that sights on bodies that are not above
the available horizon could potentially be taken with a back sight.  To consider these, set the azimuth
range from 0° to 360°.)  If desired, enter a minimum altitude for the Sun-Moon fix other than the default
value of 15°, the minimum altitude for which temperature and barometric pressure corrections are not
required.  Acceptable values are whole degrees from 0 to 90. (If 0° is used, only the upper limbs will be
above the horizon.) (Versions of Celestial Tools prior to V4.2.1 had an upper limit of 15°.  This change
allows the times that the Sun and Moon are at a higher altitude to be calculated.)  Select either "List
Visible Bodies/Sun-Moon Fix", "View Visible Bodies", or "Star Finder Data".

If "List Visible Bodies/Sun-Moon Fix" is selected, a table with three columns is displayed.  The three
columns are for: the Sun, Moon, planets, and first magnitude stars; second magnitude stars; and third
magnitude stars.  They show the name, azimuth, altitude, and magnitude of bodies that are above the
horizon. (Note that star magnitudes, as listed in the Nautical Almanac, changed in 2006.  The magnitudes
shown in Sight Planner are based on the Greenwich year derived from the date entered in the data entry
section of the Sight Planner form.)  Within each column, the bodies within the azimuth range specified
are listed in order of increasing azimuth.  For the Moon, percent illumination is given instead of
magnitude.  Bodies within the JN altitude range of 15° to 75° are shown in bold type.

Also displayed is Sun-Moon fix availability data.  A box at the bottom of the third magnitude star column
will indicate whether an acceptable Sun-Moon fix is available for the entered date, location, azimuth
range, and minimum altitude, and, if so, gives the range of zone times and the range of percent
illumination of the Moon.   An acceptable Sun-Moon fix is defined as having the centers (not the upper
limbs) of the Sun and Moon above the entered minimum altitude value, both bodies within the specified
azimuth range, and the difference in azimuths between 45° and 135°.  Particular times, or even entire
dates, might be rejected by the user if it is felt that the Moon is too narrow.  Be aware that for
certain dates and latitudes the maximum allowed altitude of one of the bodies for a particular sight
reduction method might be exceeded.

Note that in all cases, including the variations of "View Visible Bodies" described below, if the time
entered is that of sunrise, sunset, moonrise, or moonset, the corresponding body will not be considered
visible.  This is because the rise and set times are defined as when the upper limb of the body is on the
visible horizon, so the body is actually below the horizon.  A body is considered visible when its center
is above the visible horizon, so, for example, it might be several minutes after the time of sunrise
before the Sun is visible.

If "Sky View Visible Bodies" is selected, a view of how the bodies appear in the sky is displayed.  There are
three options:

If "View Overhead" is selected (the default), the view is from the inside of the celestial sphere, as it
was on the 2102-A and 2102-B Star Finders.  The diagram is oriented as if it were being held overhead
while looking at the sky:  if the "N" is to the north, east is to the right.  Azimuth increases
counterclockwise.

If "View "Star Finder"" is selected, the view is from the outside of the celestial sphere, the way it is
on the 2102-D and 2102-C Star Finders.  Azimuth increases clockwise.

In either of these cases, the center of the diagram represents the zenith, and the outer circle
represents the horizon.  The default view has south at the bottom (view toward south), but it can be
changed to view toward any of the cardinal compass points.  Circles of altitude at 15° increments are
shown:  the ones at the special JN altitudes of 15° and 75° are solid, while the rest are dotted.  Dotted
azimuth lines at 15° increments are also shown.

If "View Horizon" is selected, the view is 180° of azimuth from the horizon up to 90° altitude.  The
default view is centered on south (180°) azimuth, but it can be centered on any of the cardinal compass
points.  Lines of altitude at 15° increments are shown:  the ones at the special JN altitudes of 15° and
75° are solid, while the rest are dotted.  Dotted azimuth lines at 15° increments are also shown.

The navigational bodies are represented by filled circles of three sizes:  the larger ones represent the
first-magnitude stars and solar system bodies; the mid-sized ones represent the second-magnitude stars;
and the smaller ones represent the third-magnitude stars.  There is the option of displaying any
combination of first magnitude stars and solar system objects; second magnitude stars; and third
magnitude stars.  If the "Show Names" box is checked, the names of the bodies will appear to the right of
their circles.  (The default is all bodies without names.)

If "Limit azimuth range" is unchecked (the default), the entire available sky is shown (360º for the
"Overhead" and "Star Finder" views, 180º for the "Horizon" view).  If "Limit azimuth range" is checked,
the display is limited to the specified azimuth range.

If "Show Helpers" is checked, the positions of another 70 stars are analyzed and, if visible, the stars
are displayed.  These stars are represented by open circles to distinguish them from the 64 navigational
bodies.  Their magnitudes are represented by the size of the circles, and use the same binning as the
navigational bodies, with an additional smaller circle representing fourth magnitude and dimmer stars.
These stars include those selected to complete the most recognizable asterisms (not constellations; e.g.
the Big Dipper, not Ursa Major) that contain navigational stars, plus other "pointer" stars, with the
intent of making it easier to locate the body of interest.  Consistent with this purpose, when "Show
Helpers" is checked, the check boxes for the first, second, and third magnitude bodies become active but
are disabled, forcing the display of all available bodies.  When "Show Helpers" is unchecked, the three
magnitude check boxes return to their previous states.  The option to limit azimuth range is still
available when "Show Helpers" is checked.  The names of the helpers are not shown even if the "Show
Names" box is checked.

As the mouse pointer crosses into the sky display, the pointer changes from an arrow to a cross, and the
azimuth and altitude of its position is displayed in the boxes to the right.  Regardless of whether or
not "Show Names" is checked, when the pointer is over a body the name of the body will appear in a box by
the azimuth and altitude boxes.  (Note that if a smaller circle, representing a dimmer star is obscured
by a larger circle, representing a brighter body, the name of the dimmer star might not appear.)

Whenever "View Visible Bodies" is selected with "View Overhead" or "View "Star Finder"", an additional
function, "Best Bodies Aid", is available.  It is initially set to "Off", but if "Two-body fix", "Three-
body fix (boat)", or "Three-body fix (beach)"  is selected, red radial lines appear on the sky view, and
two additional buttons, "Rotate CW" and "Rotate CCW" become enabled.

If "Two-body fix" is selected, three pairs of red azimuth lines appear.  The two solid red lines are
separated by 90°, which results in the optimum cut (angle between LOPs) of 90° for a two-body fix.  A
pair of dashed lines and a pair in a dash-dot pattern appear.  Each pair is 22.5° on either side of a
solid red line.  If two bodies are selected, each within one of these matched pairs of broken lines, the
cut will be within the allowable range of 45° to 135°.

For a three-body fix, the optimum cut can be achieved with an azimuth spread between bodies of 120° or
60°, represented by the three solid red lines. The 120° spread is recommended when at least 240° of
horizon and clear sky is available, most likely on a boat.  When those conditions cannot be met, as when
taking practice sights on a beach (unless a back sight might help), the 60° spread is recommended.  The
"Three-body fix (boat)" and "Three-body fix (beach)" options represent the 120° and 60° choices,
respectively.  The 120° spread is preferred, but circumstances might make the 60° spread preferable even
if the 120° spread is possible.

If "Three-body fix (boat)" is selected, three additional pairs of broken lines appear, one dashed, one in
a dash-dot pattern, and one in a dash-dot-dot pattern.   Each pair is 15° on either side of a solid red
line.  If three bodies are chosen, each within one of these matched pairs of broken lines, the azimuth
spread between bodies will be from 90° to 150°, meeting the requirement that the smaller angle between
any two LOPs must be no less than 30°.

If "Three-body fix (beach)" is selected, to achieve the allowable range of cuts, the angle between the
middle body and either outer body must be greater than or equal to 30° and less than or equal to 120°,
and all three bodies must fall within a total angle of 150°.  This situation cannot be represented by
pairs of dotted lines on either side of the solid lines.  Only two dotted lines, showing the extent of
the 150° angle that all three bodies must fall within, will appear.  It is left to the user to ensure
that the other requirement is met.

All of the sets of red lines can be rotated clockwise or counterclockwise in 1° steps, using the buttons
(mouse only, no keyboard control), at a rate of about 10° per second.  This feature can be used in
combination with any of the other features in order to select the best bodies for two- and three-body
fixes based on cut, magnitude, altitude, etc.  If options are selected that do not use this feature (e.g.
"View Horizon"), the lines will reappear in their last positions when an appropriate option is selected
again or when switching between "Two-body fix" and either "Three-body fix". The lines can be removed by
selecting "Off", but will return to their last positions if "Two-body fix", "Three-body fix (boat)", or
"Three-body fix (beach)" is selected again.

Note that there is some distortion in these views compared to the actual sky, especially with the
"Horizon" view, but the altitudes and azimuths observed here should be comparable to those obtained with
"List Visible Bodies".  In the "Horizon" view there is increased distortion at higher altitudes - the
higher the altitude, the more the "sky" is stretched horizontally.  Also note that if the time of
sunrise, sunset, moonrise, or moonset is used, the Sun or Moon will not appear on the list or views,
because, as explained earlier, the times are based on the Sun's or Moon's upper limb, but their
visibility is based on their centers.

If "Star Finder Data" is selected, a table with data which a student would need to manually set a Star
Finder is displayed.  This includes zone description; GMT (UT); GHA of Aries; LHA of Aries; GHA, RA, and
Dec of the Sun and Moon; and the SHA, RA, and Dec of the planets.

If latitude, longitude, or time zone is changed, activating "List Visible Bodies", "View Visible Bodies",
or "Star Finder Data", or changing the state of any of the view check boxes automatically updates
twilight times, the visible bodies list, the visible bodies views, and the star finder data.

The entered DR latitude is used to compute the altitudes and azimuths of the visible bodies.  In order to
more closely match what would be found with a Rude Star Finder, the DR latitude can be changed to the
latitude of the appropriate blue Star Finder template before continuing.

The program can also be used as a star (or planet) identifier by using one of the "views" with "Show
Names" checked, or by matching the altitude and azimuth of the unknown body with one on one of the tables
of visible objects, for that date, time, and location.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  See Help>General>"Almanac" Accuracy.

Azimuths and altitudes of the visible bodies are calculated quite accurately (better than can be achieved
with a Rude Star Finder), but are displayed to the nearest degree.  In practice, additional precision is
unwarranted, as it is unlikely that the sights will be taken at precisely the time used in the
calculation, and a typical sextant Galilean telescope has a 4° field of view (prismatic telescopes 7°).
However, in the upper part of the form, the azimuths of the Sun and Moon, when either the upper limb or
the center of the body is selected, are shown to the nearest tenth of a degree.  (Prior to V5.1.5, the
azimuths of only the upper limbs were shown, to whole degrees, when on the visible horizon.  This was
changed so comparisons with the azimuth of the center could be made easily.)  Magnitudes of the planets
are approximate and are rounded to tenths.  The magnitudes of Venus, Mars, and Jupiter are expected to be
within 0.2 of the values in the Nautical Almanac.  The magnitude of Saturn may differ by more because the
angle of its rings is not considered in the calculation.

Times of Sun rising and setting phenomena are rounded to whole minutes and are generally accurate to
within one minute, about the accuracy achievable with the Nautical Almanac.   (The one minute difference
can be due to an actual variance of less than one second and the subsequent rounding to whole minutes.)
The azimuths are rounded to whole degrees.

With the "Approximate Moon rise and set data" box unchecked, the times of moonrise and moonset are
rounded to whole minutes and are accurate to about one minute, except at high latitudes, where the
uncertainty may reach several minutes.  For low to middle latitudes, manual calculations done with the
Nautical Almanac "precise" (Table I and Table II) method should agree fairly well, but those done with
the "approximate" method (daily pages only) can be off by almost an hour at high latitudes.  With the
"Approximate Moon rise and set data" box checked, the times should agree with an "approximate" method
calculation within one minute; the azimuths will also be approximate, based on the approximate time
calculated.  Azimuths are rounded to whole degrees.   Percent illumination is rounded to whole percent.

Often the differences between the Sun rise and set times and the twilight times calculated by Celestial
Tools and those of the tables on the daily pages of the Nautical Almanac are a result of the fact that
the Nautical Almanac tables are calculated for the middle day of the three days shown on a page, but are
applied to all three days.

There is the potential for a one minute difference between times calculated using Auto ZD and those
calculated using Manual ZD.  Each is an independent calculation, and the difference can arise because of
rounding.

For "List Visible Bodies" and related functions, altitudes and azimuths are rounded to whole degrees.
(Note that a calculated azimuth of 359.5° or greater is shown rounded to 360°, not 000°, so as to retain
its proper position when visible bodies are listed in order of increasing azimuth.)

In order to speed up the display of results on older, slower computers, the Sun-Moon calculation is done
with five-minute resolution instead of one-minute resolution.  This could potentially result in a "from"
time that is as much as four minutes late and a "to" time that is as much as four minutes early.  For its
intended purpose, this should be of no concern.  (Another slight error is due to the fact that the
calculations are done with values of altitude and azimuth that have already been rounded to the nearest
degree, but this is minor.)

