WIND & CURRENT

a. Purpose:  Calculate Course to Steer (CTS), Speed of Advance (SOA, over ground), and speed (through
water) required to achieve planned cruising speed (over ground) given the desired course to the
destination, the planned cruising speed (over ground), the set and average drift of the current, and the
leeway drift angle and wind direction.  Calculated Course Made Good (CMG, expected path over the bottom,
more accurately referred to as Track) and Speed Made Good (SMG, the resultant speed) given vessel's
heading (the direction the vessel is pointing, not necessarily the actual course) and speed,  the set and
average drift of the current, and the leeway drift angle and wind direction.

b.  Operation:  For CTS and SOA, enter the Intended Course (whole degrees), planned Cruising Speed (over
ground, knots, limited to 99.9), current Set (whole degrees), average current Drift (knots, limited to
99.9), leeway Drift Angle (if any, whole degrees), and wind direction (if any).  For TR and SOA, Heading
is used instead of Intended Course.  Wind direction, where the wind is coming from, is only enabled if
there is a non-zero value of Drift Angle.  It can be selected as one of the eight cardinal or
intercardinal compass points, or as from port or starboard, of particular use if the wind is nearly on
the bow or stern.  Press the "Calculate" button. For CTS and SOA, the CTS (with and without leeway), SOA
(over ground), and speed (through water) required to achieve planned cruising speed (over ground) are
displayed.  (If the desired course could not be achieved under the entered conditions without adjusting
the speed through the water, e.g. engine RPM, the SOA will be shown as zero or a negaive number.)  For
CMG and SMG,  the CMG (with and without leeway) and SMG (over ground) are displayed.

In most cases, either current or leeway but not both will be used.  The option to use both exists to
allow for current to be extracted from a current table or previous experience and leeway estimated from
the wind being experienced.  If drift angle due to current is known from previous current measurements,
and course, speed, and weather and sea conditions have not changed, it, and its direction, can be used
(under Leeway) in place of set and drift.  In this case, the supplement (+/- 180°) of the current set is
used to select the "Wind from" direction.

Pressing "Clear" removes all the input and output data.

Course and Set inputs can be true or magnetic or compass, but must be consistent throughout, with
resulting outputs of the same type.

The term current is used to mean not only the flow of the water surface but also the sum of all factors
causing the course made good to differ from the course steered.  Leeway is the angular difference due to
wind between the true course steered and the true course over ground, but can be used to represent the
set and drift due to current as explained above..

Current set and drift can be determined using The Sailings.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  CTS is rounded to whole degrees.  SOA and speed required to achieve planned
cruising speed are rounded to tenths of a knot.

