YELLOW PAGES (INCREMENTS AND CORRECTIONS)

a. Purpose:  Reproduces the values of the Nautical Almanac Increments and Corrections table,
traditionally known as the "yellow pages" because of their color in the government edition.  Can be
entered "forwards" or "backwards".  When entering "forwards", calculates GHA Increment for Sun/Planets,
Aries, and Moon, given UT minutes and seconds; calculates v or d correction given UT minutes and v or d
value.  When entering "backwards", calculates time given a GHA Increment for Sun/Planets, Aries, and
Moon.

The sole intent of this tool is to help the student avoid making errors, or to help find errors already
made, in using the Nautical Almanac Increments and Corrections table, for instance the common "right
page, wrong column" problem.  It does this by presenting output data for a single set of input values,
instead of the full-page format of the Nautical Almanac.

b. Operation: Select whether to enter the table "forwards" (default) or "backwards".

"Forwards" mode is typically used when extracting data from the Nautical Almanac for a sight reduction.
To calculate the GHA Increment, enter the UT minutes and seconds, and select whether to obtain the
increment for Sun/Planets, Aries, or Moon.  To calculate the v or d correction, enter the UT minutes and
the v or d value from the daily pages of the nautical Almanac, without a sign.  The GHA Increment and v
or d correction will be displayed and will be automatically updated for whatever data is currently
entered.

"Backwards" mode can be used as part of the GHA method of finding the time of meridian transit.  Select
whether to use Sun/Planets, Aries, or Moon. (Most common would be Sun, in determining the time of Local
Apparent Noon.)  Enter the degrees and minutes of the GHA Increment (limited to 15°0.00' for Sun/
Planets, 15°02.5' for Aries, 14°19.0' for Moon).  The corresponding time will be displayed, and will be
automatically updated for whatever data is currently entered.

Both "Forwards" and "Backwards" have no default object (i.e.  Sun/Planets, Aries, or Moon).  In order to
avoid a chance of error, an object must be selected.

c. Accuracy/Resolution:  Although all 21960 possible values of Increments and Corrections in the
"forwards" mode have not been compared to those in the Nautical Almanac, it is believed that they all
match.  Since the formulas for the values are published, but the method of rounding in the Nautical
Almanac is unknown, the accuracy of the Yellow Pages Increment and Correction values will be specified as
0.1'.  In the "backwards" mode, times are rounded to the nearest second  (rounded up if the GHA Increment
is exactly between two tabulated values) and should match well.

Contrary to common belief, not all Increments and Corrections tables are identical.  In 2001, four of the
10800 correction values changed, and are expected to remain with their new values in the future.
Specifically these are: minute	v or d	Corr (pre-2001)	Corr (2001 and later) 22            2.8 1.1 1.0
22           16.4               6.2                              6.1 52            9.2 8.1 8.0 52
16.4             14.4                            14.3 Celestial Tools will show both values for these
four cases.

